This is Jocko podcast number 346 with Dave Burke and me Jocko willing good evening Dave. Good evening
In an airplane the guy was a mongoose
It's hard to believe if the only bud Anderson you ever knew was the one on the ground calm
Gentleman Lee a grandfather funny and all around nice guy
But once you get him in an airplane, he's vicious shot down 17
Best fighter pilot I've ever seen
He's also the best friend I have in the world
We go back 47 years Andy and I
Andy and I developed a rapport flying mustangs in England particularly after I was shot down
Made my way back and finally got the okay to finish my tour
We were both small-town boys who liked hunting and fishing
We kept finding things in common and developed a tremendous mutual respect
By the time we finished up and went home
We were pretty damn close although making friends wasn't something either of us went out of our way to do
It was risky in wartime
We lost an awful lot of guys over there
We had the same kind of eyes
We saw everything that went on in the sky before anyone else in the squadron or even the group
What made Andy unique was that he flew so many missions logged so many combat hours and never had a battle damage or a boarded mission
An incredible record
It shows what a meticulous professional he is especially in combat
The same attention to detail is what made him a hell of a test pilot
He had those eyes too and he developed the combat skills to take advantage of the opportunities his eyes brought him
But luck was also a part of it
Luck plays a big part in anything you do in combat
Some guy you don't see can always sneak up and shoot your ass off
No question Andy is a very very lucky guy
Anyone who got through the war was
Generally speaking getting killed was the least of our worries
When it happens, you don't know anything about it anyway. So what the hell?
That's the attitude. I think that most of us had
Duty was paramount
Damn it. It's your job
The fact that you might get killed doesn't enter your mind after the first couple times
And so those right there are words
Written by Chuck Yeager
Probably the most famous and legendary fighter pilot of all time
And the words are written in the forward of a book called to fight to fly and fight
by Colonel Clarence Bud Anderson who Chuck Yeager refers to as Andy
Now by the way, I'm not sure if you've heard of it
Chuck Yeager refers to as Andy now Bud Anderson was a fighter pilot pilot in World War two
And in Vietnam he was a triple ace
Which means he shot down more than 15 enemy aircraft
He was a test pilot when being a test pilot meant you were the best of the best
He ended up serving over 30 years in uniform
And it is an honor to have him with us here tonight to discuss his experiences and lessons learned
Sir, thank you so much for joining us. It's an honor to have you here
Was my pleasure, Joe. That's quite the praise from General Yeager. You got there
He wrote it
So I guess we can jump into this I know I know you were born January 13th 1922 and
Right now the date is
August 3rd 2022
Which means you got the you got the triple digits in your age up there at a hundred
That's pretty impressive. What's the keys to your health?
No minor vices
There you go
That'll do it
You got some kind of just to get to know you a little bit
I want to read a little section from the book here and
It says I was the third of my father's four children born January 13th 1922 in Oakland where my mom's parents lived Friday the 13th
It was if it's an unlucky day, you couldn't prove it by me. I've been pretty lucky. I never was superstitious
It says Clarence a meal. Is that right a meal Anderson, Jr. On my birth certificate
But few call me Clarence or junior and none call me a meal
When I was young my family nicknamed me buddy, which in time became bud
The men I flew with used Andy because all Anderson's are automatically Andy. I
Can attest to that
The first thing I remember is Lindbergh making it across the Atlantic when he when I was just five
I have no idea why somebody flying from one place to another should have made such a lasting impression
But it kindled an interest in airplanes that would last a lifetime
When I was seven my father took me to Sacramento to a little dirt airfield with one little hangar where a fellow named
Ingvald Fager Scott
Made or supplemented his living by taking people up for rides in a Steerman biplane
The airfield was an Auburn Boulevard near Watt Avenue
I can remember being excited and a little bit frightened the incredible
intoxicating smell of the gasoline oil and airplane dope like a new car smell and the throaty sound of the engine
most of all I remember flying over our house and
Circling tightly the pilot standing the plane on its side. It's a pretty awesome introduction to aviation
The the biplane was the first thing you flew in huh? Yes, and so that's just a big giant open cockpit
Was your dad with you or is only a two seat? Yeah, it was a three-seater
Okay, you know the pilot in the back and then side by side seats
Hmm. Okay in the front
And he buzzed your house. Yeah
So you could say your dad is partially to blame for your fascination with flying he supported my
my
Likes mm-hmm. So what did you what did your mom and dad do when you were growing up?
Well, I grew up on a farm and that's what we did we farmed
And that means you were probably working more than most people work in their lives. Yeah, I had
Yeah pretty heavy
chores and
Then later on is a depression
Hip
My mom had to go
Go to go back to work
And she went and found a job in
the
governor's office and
She was just a typist and everything and then worked her way up to office manager
And then it was it was in that oldies a spoiled system
So when a new governor came in they fired everybody
and then
they kept her to
You know tie in got it and then pretty soon they they
Dropped her salary and everything
but suddenly soon they
Said why don't you stay brought her salary back up and then she's went through about four governors like that
Pretty pretty awesome. Yeah, I mean
It
Wait for the depression and being in a farmer during the depression. Yeah, how rough was that for for the family?
Well at least we we didn't suffer too bad from food because we manufactured food, right?
We raised chicken was an
Um, good lots of vegetables and fruit of course
so a lot of canning and
So as a kid, I don't remember being hungry at any time. Wow
Well, that's a definitely a good family business to have during the depression being a farmer
And so but you still had to go to school, right? Oh, yeah, and I know you played you played sports in school. I
was I
Like the basketball, but I was kind of small so I could only play on the sea and the
meetings I
Could never go to the varsity
But it sounds like you know in the book you talk about sounds like your dad not only encourage you with flying but he put a lot of
He put a lot of
It seemed like he put a lot of trust in you even as a young kid a lot of responsibility
I know you and you know, I get asked a lot of questions about parenting and at one point you crashed your car
How that happened oh
Young and
Young and scared hit the wrong pedal. Yeah. Well, yeah, well
As you came up
You can't see that here, but there's a double road at the front door
and it always went on the inner inner road, you know and
So I came around the corner
He's an he's behind the wheel and I'm over here
Steering and you know with the foot pedal too
and so I come up to
Go down the road and oh it's blocked by a car
So I said oh I gotta gotta get over here in the left and get on my bypass and
and a big
Tree was coming up and I went to the middle and pushed down on accelerator and ducked my head under the
dash I think and dad was
It he was trying to get me to get out of there, you know, but I was I don't know
It's just a bad bad thing
But the interesting thing is how he kind of handled that, you know
He kind of got you right back on the horse as they say. Oh, yeah, you know, how if you go through a
Terrifying experience
It's best to get them back on back online
Now speaking of terrifying experiences for someone that has aspirations of being a pilot
I know there was a plane crash that took place in your hometown
How did that impact you and how did that steer you away from wanting to be a pilot?
well, I had a buddy down there in Lumas nearby town and
He and I were just kind of nuts about anything aviation is this Jack. Yeah, Jack Sacker and
so
This was something we had to investigate personally
And it was an old Boeing
Byplane three engine by plane
He crashed in the
On the side of a hill not too heavy
Dan well, you know was the whole fuselage was there and the other parts of it got in order in the area
and
So we just had to we just had to see what it was like
Yeah, and I guess in those days, there's no black box. There's no real way to tell what had even gone wrong
No
But you looked at that and said
Still seems like a good
Seems like a good job. I want well, maybe we want to fly fighters
So I'm gonna fat and by the way, I'm gonna read some chunks of the book the book is fantastic
Get just order the book right now. It's just an incredible book with so many details in it
I'm gonna fast forward a little bit. You say right after graduation
I was working out in the yard when a car came chattering into the drive a fellow climbed out
Extended his hand showed me his teeth and started telling me in a practice salesman's pitch
About this trade school and down down in Los Angeles or someplace
He said they could teach me all about refrigeration a good solid career and he pulled a bunch of brochures from his bag
I'm thinking how college would have been nice, but I've got to do something and then dad came around the corner
We hadn't talked much about the future
We talked more about Arthur J. Lewis the several months previous than we'd ever talked about my future
But there and then in the yard. I learned that my dad was pretty shrewd and supportive
Go on get out of here. He told the salesman gruffly my boy is going to college and then he's going into the Army Air Corps
so he
He was convinced that this is what you were going to do. Yeah, and he was fully supportive. I think was the other way around
Fast forward a little bit you say there were three requirements for enlisting in the Army Air Corps beyond passing the physical
You needed two years of college. I figured to complete the course in June 1941
You had to be at least 20 years old
Which I would be on January 13th, 1942 and you had to be single
Which seems simple enough since I had no good prospects
This course of study would qualify me and if it turned out I couldn't fly for some reason then at least I could fix or build airplanes
So that's what you're thinking. You're focused on getting into the Army Air Corps. There's some
Pretty minimal requirements really to go and enlist. I
Mean not being married sounds like you were trying the field but hadn't turned anything out yet
So you were all right there. Well, you're physical with something you you know your eyes
Did you know when they gave you the physical that your eyes were awesome I
Can't remember I think maybe
We did go get a air dock to give me a flight physical. I don't really I
Don't really remember
You end up
Taking flying lessons so you're learning how to fly
And you say this my instructor Dale Hunter was an old guy
24 maybe I don't remember that learning was terribly difficult on the daily rating sheets
There were 36 descriptive words or phrases some positive some otherwise
All or none of which the instructor could check after each lesson
The four he marked after my first flight March 4th 1941 war
cooperative rough on controls careful poor coordination on
March 27th the day that I soloed he put a mark by erratic by the end of May
After 37 hours in the cub he would check only eager to learn and consistent
I don't remember a lot of compliments, but I soloed after the standard eight hours of instruction
Did everything pretty much by the numbers got my license no problem
So there you go. You're learning how to fly pretty pretty quick. It seems like yeah, I was
What I guess
17 or 18 yeah, it
Was a government program
Civilian pilot training program and
With no commitment no
Finance, oh, I think it was a
insurance policy for my parents and $9.50
and
It was a pretty good deal. So I globed on to it while I was going to
Junior college so so what year was that that you soloed for the first time?
41 so that was 1941. Yeah, so spring
So when did so when did Pearl Harbor happen? So it happened December 7th. Yeah, so you were already flying
But you weren't old enough to enlist yet, correct
and
We were I went to work
Like my college training
Qualified me to be an aircraft mechanic. It was a technical school part of a two-year thing and
The Sacramento Air Depot was building up as a depot and
And they were hiring anybody that said they could turn a wrench. I think
They hired our whole class
man
This was after Pearl Harbor. They hired your whole class
Right at graduation. Oh graduation graduation six months before got it pile Harbor
And I can remember to this day
well every guy if we're a war two guy knows where he was December 7th and
We were working 24-7 and
Being the kids young guys they put us on the graveyard shift
and I just got none days and
And I remember Sunday
I came around later in the day and
Said hey you you you
Go home and come back at midnight. Jeff's just attacked us at Pearl Harbor
God, I didn't even know where Pearl Harbor was
But I knew the impact of that was
Oh, we're at war and
I was still
And
So I had to wait one month. I
Went down on my birthday and a few days later. I
Raised my right hand and I was on my way
You say in the book on the 13th of January my 20th birthday I went in to sign up
They had a recruiting office right there on base
They gave me a physical and I was so keyed up with anticipation that they gave me the
Schneider test a blood pressure and pulse check the doctor said I was borderline there might be a problem
My heart was pounding away like a jackhammer. I was told to come back in a couple days
They test me again after I was accepted
I couldn't wait to tell Lloyd
Geraldson an older guy who'd been a pilot and done some barnstorming
He worked at the depot and we often carpool together
I looked up to him like to listen to him talk about flying. I told him the moment he got in the car and
He leaned back against the passengers door and stared at me silently
Son he said after a while. Let me tell you something. You've just signed your own death warrant
That's a heavy statement. Yeah years later
We talked about it years later and he said he doesn't remember saying that
He was just throwing it out there it had a little impact on me, but not much
Hmm
So then you start flight training. Yeah, and it was all the flight training down in San Diego
Just my primary. Okay, so you go down there and from the book it sounds like you you already knew how to fly
So got a private pilots license. Did that make it just a lot easier than the other people were having I?
Don't remember having any trouble
Going through the military
I
I don't think there was too much
of that
Tell you the truth
It probably just pilot maybe yeah
So you guys were busy creating the aura that guys like Dave Burke would get to live off of
So you get your wings do you get your wings at the end of primary?
No, you got to go through three flight schools
Primary basic and advanced about three months along
And do you know that you're going to be a fighter pilot? I mean because you could be a transport pilot
How do you how do they figure out who's going to get to be a fighter pilot especially?
At that time when I went in
if you
Knew what you wanted to do
And I could convince your instructor
That you'd be a good fighter pilot
Your chances were pretty good of getting what you wanted
We needed they were trying to build up
From
You know a few few
Hundreds of pilots
To 225,000 pilots
And don't let safety get in the way of progress
progress
And I'd like to I don't think this is in my book, but uh a sad
Statistic of world war two is
We killed more of our own pilots in training
Than we did in combat
Wow
That's uh, that's definitely a crazy statistic especially
Like the new generation like Dave the safety was number one
100% right
Yeah, I mean safety is a huge thing
You did say something I wanted to ask about though
Didn't everybody want to be a fighter pilot or are there guys that actually wanted to fly other airplanes?
I think there was
An equal number of wanted to fly multi engine
Gotcha
Um, and I don't know where my fighter pilot thing came from actually
I think it was watching the
Battle of britain newsreels
You know wow and
Then I thought you know
If I'm a fighter pilot in a single place
fighter
I'm responsible for keeping me alive
And I'd be the pilot the navigator the radio man the gunner
the
bomber bombardier all of those things
And then I would not have to depend on 10 more
crews of 10
And besides that I thought the fighters were a little bit cooler
Well, I mean you want to talk about the building the aura of pilots
I mean the battle of britain if you're watching that thing happen and you're seeing those spitfires and the
Spitfires going out there and doing their work that had to at least start the momentum going for fighter pilots becoming what we now know as fighter pilots
So once you do get trained you go you get sent to uh,
San Francisco and you start flying a p39 for the 328th fighter group
Correct, and you're flying coastal defense
Well, I think that's just because we were there
And we were flying military airplanes and they we didn't have any coastal defense
And so you know you grabbed what you had and said okay you were part of it
Yeah, it sounds like a job that
Sounds like a job they kind of need something for you to do
And they're not sure what although Dave you threw you flew combat air patrols over
LA after september 11th, right? May our squadron right at right at starting on 9 11. We had a
Mission starting that morning where we were flying missions up and down the coast
Yeah, so that's uh kind of similar right
I imagine it came from from not knowing what was going to happen next
You know we had none of a clue. Yeah, and we we uh stayed up all night one time
Because there was a report of a
Japanese fleet
You know coming toward the coast
And it was it was ours
They didn't tell anybody
Well, that's not a good side
You ended up losing your wingman
In that time frame
Is that right? Oh
Yeah, I had a wingman. We were doing a
You know he was a brand new and so he was just getting checked out
And I
Had him on my wing and I'm flying on here come a couple of navy planes
And that wasn't uncommon. You know we had a lot of navy there in the Bay Area too
And so it wasn't unusual that we would
Attack each other and
Have a little dog fight
and the two navy planes came by and came across this and
and
I started heading down
towards towards us
and
I was wagging my wings like
Hey, wait a minute. Don't bother me now
But that may have maybe waving my wings, but hey
Let's have a dog fight. You know who knows
and so
I made a
Pretty steep turn into them
And my my new wingman just just maybe his second ride in the fighter
Got in here and stalled the thing
And I watched him
Go into the bay
Yeah, um
Reflecting on that in the book you say
Dying was easy a piece of cake lots of people would die
And I and so I suppose I began putting up walls
I knew I had to concentrate on what I was doing and block out the rest
Jager wrote about that in his book how he stayed away from people didn't want to get close
I don't know that I consciously carried it to that extreme, but it came out the same
If you fly airplanes drive race cars do stunts for movies or maybe walk a high wire with the flying willendas
Anything truly hazardous
Then losing friends goes with the territory
We're talking serious stress here and you either cope or you don't
Death is a thing that you have to get used to as cruel and hard as it sounds
From that point on from that point on I resolved to control my emotions no matter how hard that might be
And you got some other
Um
Some other things that you talk about
Just about being a good fighter pilot
Uh, you because you're you know, you're mentioning that you got to control your emotions
You also say a fighter pilot mentality was taking firm route now living close to the edge
Sort of went with the job
Daring audacity creativity flare
These things were as much a part of being a
Good fighter pilots makeup as skill and sound judgment and were encouraged within certain parameters
Sometimes of course we stretch those a little the rest of the time more than a little
You measured a pilot by his formation flying as much as by dog fighting
Some guys would weave in and out just couldn't hold it there and some the talented ones could stick to your wing like paint
You'd bank and go down and the good ones would stay right there no closer no farther away
This was wartime however, and there was the other kind too
We needed pilots so there was reluctance to wash people out and even more so once they'd gotten their wings
marginal pilots slipped through not many and almost no truly bad ones at least not in fighters
But there were pilots that made you uncomfortable wingtip to wingtip
Chuck Jaeger was in the first group of pilots that joined us at tonapah
We had only six months more experience than the guys straight out of flying school
But that was a lot we knew how to fly p 39s the new guys hadn't seen one
Some found the transition tricky at first but not Jaeger
Chuck became the first the yardstick by which we would measure the rest as they joined us several each month
Jaeger could fly right from the start. He was pretty impressive
Jaeger and Chuck McGee had been flying sergeants graduates of a program for non commissioned officers
Then someone decided pilots had to be officers. So they made up a rank flight officer
equivalent to a warren officer one grade below second lieutenant
So these guys were unusual what we called blue bars after the color of their insignia
The two lowest ranking pilots in the squadron
He was from West Virginia and had a terrible draw
Over the years I got the impression that he loved to use it
Never tried to hide it practiced it for all I knew
He had such a distinctive voice you had no trouble picking him out on the radio
And he had those eyes hunter's eyes
Most of the aces could pick up far off airplanes a little quicker than the rest of the men
But as often as not it was Jaeger spotting the enemy first and announcing it over the radio
Making it sound like the Grand Old Opry
When it wasn't him calling them out it was usually me
So that's a big deal to have the eagle eyes that you guys had
Yeah it really was when you think about it we didn't have any kind of a
Ground control you know toward you know many bandits at 12 o'clock
You had to see him
It was an incredibly important in combat
Dave you got good eyes don't you?
I was uh I was given the gift of of really good vision and so
But it's not as important now no because you just get basically in a modern
You just got to be able to see the screens in front of your face, right?
Thanks
It's
I would not draw a comparison of what what Colonel Anderson
Needed in terms of the vision but having good eyesight even today
Is a huge advantage because at some point all the computers all the information
You were talking about even someone on the ground telling you where to go and where to look
Eventually you have to see him yourself
And the sooner you see him the better and the better your eyes are the sooner you see him. So
For me
50 years later to me
50 years later listened you describe a fighter pilot daring creative stretching limits
It's the exact same way we think about it 50 years later
So your explanation is is timeless for what a good fighter pilot makes so it was really cool to read that and hear that from you
Now you get trained up and eventually you get orders to europe
You get orders to europe and again to fast forward a little bit through the story here
And people got to get the book to get the all the details
But you guys ride over
To england on on the queen elizabeth
right
So but I it's not exactly the luxury liner that you wanted it to be right
They'd pack you in there with what 17 000 guys
Yeah, it was something like that
A division
infantry division
Plus the fighter group and yeah, I did something like that. Yeah, it's a big number
The air conditioning I assume wasn't great on that on that ride over. Well, it was for our gis
They had to ride
24 hours on that open deck. They had plenty of air conditioning
and then 25
24 hours in the hole
Yeah, but I was a captain
So I got a honeymoon suite on the
Fourth floor nice with 17 other guys
Uh, and you had to be were you thinking all about like you boats like getting oh my gosh, yeah
We had not won the battle before the Atlantic yet
and we were taking
Pretty good losses
Yeah, and I figured that the queen mary and the queen elizabeth had to be primary targets
You know that there was to be a ring of them out there off of new york
And which we'd have to go through
But you know, they did that the whole war and
ours, I'm no were never damaged or anything
They were fast
And
They'd change course, you know every so often
They would take alternative routes instead of going directly across
I remember we went down by the azores on our trip to the anglin
and so
Yeah thinking thinking
About you boats was was very high on my list
Yeah, that's gotta be scary
And you know, they didn't have enough lifeboats for 10 or 15,000 people on that
Oh my god, I don't know whether they did or not, but we had lifeboat drills all the time
Wow
Uh, you end up arriving in england
December 4th 1943
And
I'm gonna get into a little section here
You say I don't remember when or how I learned about jack
He'd been shot down over germany on november 13th and was listed as missing
But I don't remember how I found out
It seems clear I had a note from my sister, but I have no memory of it
I don't recall what my emotions were
Though in thinking this book through I've tried
I'm certain I wrote a letter about it to elinor saying how terribly sorry I was
But I have no memory of what the letter contained exactly
And and elinor was was jack's wife
Like most men who've known combat
I can remember the finest detail the nuances what airplanes look like in my gun sights what I felt in the swirl of battle
What I said to people and what they said to me on certain days 40 odd years ago
I can remember silly things the words to some glenn miller tunes the first points I ever scored in a basketball game
These things are burned into me. I can summon them up in an instant
But as for things in my heart on the day I found out my best friend had been shot down and possibly killed
No clue remains
All of that is blocked out
The screen is blank
Before anyone thought up computers or knew what delete buttons were I had one and I punched it
That was how we all managed
On December 12th, I wrote my parents. I received june's letter
Although it had been bad news about jack. It still was swell to get my first mail here
I can imagine how you can imagine how I feel about it
But as long as he is just reported missing
I won't worry about him
Much later we would learn he'd survived the bailout from his p-38, but it died in hospital
Jack stacker is buried in belgium in one of those sprawling white on green military cemeteries
That we americans maintain so meticulously the cross is all in row
He was married two weeks before he went off to war and then never came home
Like 291,130 other american boys in that war
It was just his fourth mission
So this I mean this is jack the boy that you grew up with the boy that you were obsessed with airplanes with
The kid that you both wanted to go and fly
And here you are basically almost as soon as you arrive in england you find out that
That he's been shot down
Yeah, yes
I don't know what else I can say other than what you just read
Um, it was a blow to me
But then it
We knew he was in the hospital we learned that
And so he had to been alive
So there was some hope, you know, you know, drag along and on and on and then you find out he's killed
it's uh
Maybe a easy way to break him on it, but it's still a blow no matter how you slice it
Meanwhile you guys get issued the first
P-51s that are going to enter the war
And
Tell me about that p-51 the first time you got to fire that thing up
Well, I'm going to go back further than that when we got the word
I don't think any of us had even seen a Mustang let alone fly one
And then after we got to fly or fly him
Uh
It was kind of a
Do-it-yourself checkout
Uh
We would send a guy up to the port where they were assembled
Find a crew chief
Learn how to start it
And bring it back and check out the next guy
And uh
I can hear again. I'm I'm one of these lucky guys
About this time a group commander came by and says hey, but we're gonna
Uh
They call me Andy actually
You're gonna go to the
Royal Air Force central
flight instructor school gunnery instructor
And uh
Take a p-51 and fly the course with a p-51 instead of
a spitfire
Which is what the course
was taught in
So that gave me 35 hours in the Mustang before combat
Where other guys were lucky to get
Uh two or three flights
Uh
I make that sound
You know really bad but
It was so much better than the p-39 and we knew it and boy we weren't gonna bitch
But the bad thing about it was the handbooks didn't even come with the airplane
And so we're we're making it up
And
And it didn't have to be that way because the pioneer Mustang group was already in
The theater checked out
But they just didn't have a way of passing the word to you guys well, I don't know why though
Dave what do you want to know about the p-51 Mustang?
I'm trying to imagine that feeling of of and I think you described it
They didn't quote tell you where you were gonna go, but you knew where you were going
Oh, yeah, but you left your p-39s behind
Yes, so did you know did you have a thought that they were going to be p-51s there or was that a surprise when you found out?
well
When when I
Looking back at it
We wondered where we would go, you know with p-39s
And
be in North Africa or
South Pacific where they were
being used
And so
We heard at the same time we're going to go to England and we're getting the brand new p-51 Bravo
So that one was a surprise but
When we got there
Not having airplanes there waiting for us was a little bit of a surprise
And so then that's when we learned that oh, we're gonna go to the port and bring bring your own airplane home
Oh, Jesus
Uh, and we thought we thought once we flew the airplane
Boy, we didn't bitch about a thing
It was so much better than the p-39
You know, we didn't want to get bitch bitch too much said okay guys you can go to african
fly your old p-39
We love that Mustang
Ah, it was it was a great airplane and it was
It it
It was a perfect airplane for the european theater
It had such long range and endurance
highly maneuverable
and
Just no negative things people said oh well it was liquid cool and one bullet hole in there would
ruin your whole day. Well, we didn't have many of those believe it or not
and so even that didn't
turn out to be a
You know a big negative factor
And I gotta say
A thing or two here that might cannot come out clear in my book
They arrived with a Mustang in europe
And jimmy do little taken over the eighth air force
Made a significant impact on the air war in europe and the eventual downfall of germany
What was the what was what was the correlation there? Okay, let's see
In late 43
The eighth air force
But their b-17s b-24s
Had a bombing halt they stopped doing what they were doing
And they're making you know they were supposed to kill the luft waf so we could have the invasion
of of europe
And you can't go without it
you got to kill the
enemies air
and
The way they were trying to do it was uh, they thought they could do it alone. They thought they could go without
it
fighter escort or anybody
And they forgot to tell the luft waf of about it and they were having tremendous losses
So they have a
Bombing halt and said okay. We've got to have escort we
And they said oh by the way then pioneer Mustang group is over here in europe
In the ninth air force which was a tactical air force that was going to go with the invasion
And they put the pioneer Mustang was signed to it the ninth air force
Said we understand they have pretty good range and everything. Why don't we try them so they've blown the uh
through 54th fighter group the
uh pioneer group to the
8th air force and they were so wildly successful
That they air for 8th air force demanded that they get
p-51s
We're the next one coming
so we go
Almost directly to the 8th air force. We were we were assigned to the ninth for a short time
and uh
When we got our airplanes
well then
tactics
The 8th air force was in charge
and the 8th fighter command
Told us how to escort
They said we want to see you we want you close
Uh when the enemy comes in we want just to drive it away and
When just drive them away and then come back
You know is this this being videoed? Yes, it is people people to be able to watch your hands
Fighter pilots can't tell their story without using their hands
It's impossible if I had to put my hands down here. I couldn't tell you we would just stop recording
No, we can see you and they can see you and so uh
So their tactic was just we actually had uh
An altitude limit we we could take them to 18 000 feet if you haven't shot him down
Break it off come back up
It wasn't the way to do it as it turned out
But we do what we're told
And further they were um
their ideas of um
Oh, they have all the strategic air command was you know was their basic
Uh thinking that the bombers could go in
And didn't need help they could destroy the enemy's war making capability
And the troops could just walk in
Well, like I said, they didn't tell the Luftwaffe about it
So um
They were even so upset. Oh, they were bombing factories oil
Anything to do with a production of fighters or just fighters on the ground, you know inventory
So uh
The the chief of staff was so upset about it. He uh
Had given them several
Written instructions
You got to kill the
Luftwaffe
And they just weren't doing it
So they fired the 8th Air Force commander
And brought in Jimmy Doolittle
Who had a personal talk with the chief of staff
And he said Jimmy Doolittle
The mission is to destroy the Luftwaffe
I don't care how you do it
And so
He was well, you guys all know who he is and what
Things he'd done
Doolittle read shortly after Pearl Harbor, you know incredible stuff
Blind flying
And uh
So he was more primal and uh
He uh
He came down to I didn't know this I read it in his book later
He came down to visit the 8th fighter command headquarters
I went you know
first time
And they walked through and they had this single visit door
The mission of the 8th fighter command is to bring the bombers home safely
Something like that
He said
Who put that who put that up there?
And general Kepner said I don't know it was here when I got here
And he says well tear it down
The mission of the 8th fighter command
Is to destroy the Luftwaffe
No more 18,000 feet
Now it was pursuing destroy that was of official
Our orders were now you fighters you're turned loose
And you know we had felt like we were my first month I guess I was old there was under those
restrictions
And we did have the feeling that you were tight you know you had your hands by we wanted to get into the fight
We just
Were also eager
It was incredible
And what that happened he turned that the energy loose
And that's actually
How we defeated the Luftwaffe
We shot down their experience test pilots one by one
And by spring
Oh no that's the spring of 41
41 yeah
And
The invasion was
Was planned for
6th June
And
So by the you know by May
The Germans could not put up a mass
Against us
Well, we were we were putting up
thousand bombers
and
Eight nine hundred fighters maybe you know that would be the maximum we go we get those kind of missions
When we were trying to do it the beginning
The Germans would put up a big a big fuss about it
I mean hundreds of airplanes
and
By they by May
They could not do that anymore
And that allowed the
Invasion to start
And led to the eventual
downfall of
Of Germany
And I credit general do little
Turning the fighter pilots loose
his policies
And they were able to the Mustang of having a significant impact
on the war in Europe
when you guys
Took the Mustang out when you're flying it how much intel did you have
About the enemy fighters. Did you know when you got that
Mustang up going as fast as it could go. Did you think to yourself or did you know?
Hey, the mischishment can only go this fast the Junker can only go that fast
Did you did you you know nowadays?
We kind of analyze maybe even over analyze the enemy, but we have pretty good intelligence about what their capabilities are
When you got that Mustang did you pretty quickly realize you were going to have the upper hand?
Pretty pretty soon. I felt I felt like I learned it real quick
Uh, especially in altitude I learned later that um
A measure smith in the hands of a good pilot down low
Could give a Mustang a hard time
Mm-hmm, but I never experienced that
Fortunately, I guess I'd like to say a little bit about the Pacific of the
European theater
The airplanes in the in the European war
We're all very close in performance
109 190
Uh, not the the twin engine ones. You could just forget them first guy there got the most
Um
Oh so compared to the zero, you know where you had to we had we had and
We're faster and could climb higher and they were
But don't turn with a zero, you know, it's what I
get I never had to but I
that's when I
heard
intelligence
Reports
Therefore I'd say in Europe
The pilots made a lot of difference
Whereas not so much in the
Japanese theater
You you you had to use tactics, you know, don't dogfight
So
I think that that that was a factor in the
In the European war
Where was I?
No, that's it. You were just wanting to point out the differences and we it's
We have to bring up your bird. You your bird was named old crow
After the whiskey
Well, I tell my Baptist friends it's named after the most intelligent bird that flies in the sky
But my drinking buddies all know it is named after that bourbon
And I wouldn't call it good old anymore because it's it it's down on the bottom shelf
It was the cheapest stuff we could find
Oh, yeah, it's great these pictures of your of your bird
Uh, you know, you can see very prominently. It's painted old crow is on there. Everybody knew who you were
Uh, you know just talking about these bomber escort missions a little bit you go over some of the stuff in the book
But the the bomber crew tour
Was 25 missions. That's something that a lot of people talk about that that if you were in a bomber crew
You had to go and execute
25 missions if you got through 25 missions, you were done. You could go home
Now what's interesting is as you pull as you pull the
The thread on that number
Well, they expected and anticipated
That on each one of these big bombing missions there was going to be 4 losses
So what does that mean? You take somebody with a 4 chance of getting shot down you multiply that times 25 and you get 100
percent chance of getting shot down is what they had these
Bomber guys doing and what's it what's even scarier than that was that the actual life expectancy the actual
Number that you would get shot down on it was between 12 and 14 missions. So the 4 was a low number
now
interestingly my great uncle who I'm named after his name was George Gretin my middle name is Gretin
And he was a bombardier in the 306th bomb group and he he was uh
He flew in a b-17
Which was known as tarheel peggie
And tarheel peggie
Was shot down on april 24th 1944 and this was right when you were flying in that area
I don't know if you flew on that day, but he was shot down april 24th 1944
There was 10 crew members on board as you were talking about five were killed and five were killed
Five were made it out parachuted down
Became POWs that actually includes my great uncle George Gretin
He was a POW and he survived prison camp and eventually came home
But that job that you guys had
To go and protect these bombers that were going in and you you mentioned a little bit of the scale
Uh, here's the scale of some of these missions that you all were doing. There was there was this operation
Which was called operation argument, which you refer to in the book as the big week
That started it. So the big week
On one of these one one mission. This is one mission happening
417 b-17s hit one set of targets
314 b-17s hit another set of targets
272 b-24s hit another set of targets
So so right there you've got what's almost a thousand bombers heading in and they were escorted by
94 p-38s
668 p-47s and 73 p-51 mustangs
This this like level
A scale of combat is something we can't my generation Dave's generation
We can't even comprehend what it means to have a thousand aircraft Dave
What was the most number of aircraft you had in the sky over iraq or afghanistan?
The missions that it was probably a big one was in the 20s 24 airplanes
That was a mission commander for 24 airplanes and that was a handful
Yeah, so what does it look like when you're in the air with close to 1500 or 2000 aircraft?
Well, the beast the bombers would go in they take off real early in the morning
assemble and then
Get get lined up and all start climbing at the same time
And especially in the winter or cold temperatures up there
We'd leave
Intense
What the hell am I trying to oh like trails contrails and
They would last
You know, they were long
And last we sometimes we made our own overcasts with all these
Then the fighters
Join them later
You know
We could see them we could see them for a hundred miles, you know forget up on top of
the last overcast and
And so we went ahead and we had a heading
And he'd arrive up there
Hopefully at the proper time
But if it wasn't
You remember on the tails of the b-17s they put these big letters
Square d a
Big big letters
We would join see what the letters were
And then fly up and down and find ours
God it was
It sounds
It sounds hard, but actually when you're doing it every day
It wasn't so bad, you know, just kind of routine go up here. Okay. Oh
That's not ours
You know go up here and there go back and would you would you be assigned to one bomber or like a group of
How many how many would you would you and your team be covering?
Well, that's a good question. They flew in little three-shot bees
And there'd be about 60 of those
60 more 60 more 60 more
And um
We would
God, I don't know
You covered just justice. Well, how many how many different radio frequencies would you have?
Four different radio frequencies and you just flip from channel to channel
Was there a common frequency? How can you have a common frequency with a thousand or two thousand aircraft? Well, that was the
Emergency channel got it
Everybody and his brother was on
That must have just been like filled with chatter the whole time. Yeah, that was really
And then you had a bomber fighter
Then we had our
Our own channel
And we used that sometimes to come home we did we'd get a steer
We'd uh, we'd get a practice steer, you know, what's it? What do you mean by that? What's a practice steer?
Just terminology, but what does it mean? I don't know what it means Dave. You know what it means
I think he's talking about giving you a vector
So so you knew which way to go to get back to where you needed to be
And you wouldn't want to say he didn't you wouldn't want to say I really need this now
You know it was a practice
You don't want to admit your you need a heading so he gave me a practice steering
They go I want you to go 180 and and that was them telling you how to get home without having to admit it
You probably use somebody else's voice when you're asking for those practice steers so you didn't sound like yourself
Um
Yeah, it's just hard for us to even imagine a 2000 aircraft in the sky. What do you when you're when you're flying in
What's your first indication? How do you know it's how do you know the enemy's coming?
Is it the first the anti aircraft that starts to come up the ack ack? No, you got that all the time
That's just whenever they felt flew over
Um, we're all wrong place
Um
And is that just a matter of chance whether it hits you or not some the fighters we didn't we didn't worry too much about the flag
That was that really was after the
bombers
But they would shoot us
too
You were talking one time about looking off in the distance and and it looked like little gray puffs of smoke
You'd see hundreds of airplanes and you and I guess probably chuck yeager more than anybody
But you could see the enemy aircraft coming
But it didn't look like airplanes at first. I think your description was almost it looked like little clouds
Yeah, and it used to be that was a little hundred ship
No, that's another thing that you know that we had to get used to
In practice
We were lucky to um
Sometimes get four ships up to practice formation. That was a big deal a four ship
We did a lot of two
for formation training
And every day
In england when we flew we flew with
16 ship formation per squadron
three squadrons
lead one over here and one over here
and uh
Two spares they flew across the channel
turn around
if they weren't needed
and
flies through two or three
layers of overcast
Probably more likely than not
And we had never never flew
I don't I think I can remember flying in a group formation one time
in training
Were there mishaps
with
Fighters hitting each other and american fighters and bombers just on the way over to the target
Did that happen or was it was it pretty well coordinated guys figured it out really fast?
It was pretty good
considering
but
My own flight. I lost a wingman
two flights here
and
Climbing through
And somehow these two guys drift together
One of the worst ones I ever saw was
uh
B17s, you know how you can have days when you can
Look down and see pretty good, but you can't see forward
Well, there was a lot of those
and
We see these two columns of b17s
We're sitting up here
And they're going along at the same rate
So you can see it looking down? Yeah, and they're same altitude
And they're going
And they got a mission recall
Canceled the mission
And these guys went like this
Oh my god, you could see it coming, you know
Nothing you can do
You know, they lost about four guns right there
That was a hell of a sight to see a bomber go down. I mean to us
Oh
You you um
Going to the book here a little bit and when you're you're now flying you say we were fighter pilots
Flying the damnedest fastest most lethal airplanes anyone ever dreamed up the forward line in defense
Of the entire free world
We were 22 years old give or take two years and carrying the entire war on our shoulders
And doing a pretty good job of it too to judge by what the new newspapers told us
We were winning the fight and developing egos that would make musselini look humble
We weren't like other people at least not in our own minds
We were bolder braver smarter more spirited
Better
Our eyesight was keener our reflexes quicker. We were risk takers too who worked and played hard
We were confident self-reliant able to stand on our own and proud of it
Most of all we were motivated
aggressive
Only the fittest and most competitive survived the training and then the deadly winnowing out imposed by our last and best teacher
the german air force
I was no fighter by nature at least not with my fists. I can count the fights of my youth on one hand
But I enjoyed competing and racing cars or dueling with airplanes
Was a way of compensating for my slender build and testing myself against anyone
I enjoyed combat which is not quite the same thing as saying that I enjoyed killing
Combat was exciting
Addictive a test of our metal and manhood a crucible in which men became a cut above the ordinary
We thought that we we thought we were that and we were encouraged to think it all through our training
Because we couldn't have done what we did without thinking it
Why else would they have let us fly under bridges and buzz people's houses?
It took a big ego to fly to Berlin with anything resembling enthusiasm
We were never afraid most of us anyway. I truly believe that scared sometimes you would have to be stupid not to be concerned
respectful
But never afraid the way a little kid is afraid of the dark or the way you might fear some dark alley knowing something is there waiting for you
Waiting for you. We were so young. I suppose we just didn't know any better
Combat is like a near miss in an automobile
It happens and you react instinctively to it and later on you might say
That was close and your fingers might tremble a little but while it's happening you don't pause to assess it and say
My god, I'm going to die here
There simply isn't time. You just do what you have to do
I never saw a man crack not in our group. I don't remember anyone standing down because he was what we called
Flack happy
There was a guy who lost a brother and wept openly every so often about it
But he flew he did his job
Nobody had to be lifted out of his cockpit frozen up staring
Stress at least in our corner of England wasn't what hollywood might have you believe
Although it was there no denying it
So there's the attitude
You know you point something else you point something else out in here. I had a violet, right?
sir
This is like I have to deal with Dave all the time on this stuff
The description couldn't be better. It's written perfectly
You also mentioned in the book and I don't think I have it marked out to read but
You talk about how when you look at the films that they made
after the war
All the pilots are 30 30 30 years old or 35 years old
You know in the in the famous world war II fighter pilots
And you say it was a bunch of kids that were 20 21 22 years old
Yeah
That's right
I'm going to go to a little combat here
Flying skill I've always felt meant more in Europe than it did in other theaters where the airplanes had different
differing strong points the p38 was successful in the pacific
Although it couldn't turn with the zero because it was much faster when diving
Its pilot could attack from above and then keep going and the zero had no chance of catching it
Same with the p40 earlier on
The fog wolves and measurements had more speed
The pacific tactics wouldn't work on these aircraft and the p38s was much less effective against them
To beat them you had to turn with them like i'm turning with this 109
Right now northwest of Hanover. We're flying in interlocking circles, but on differing planes
Descending we pass one another once twice three times at ridiculous angles
With neither of us in a position to fire
I feel like i'm gaining but not very much and i'm excited and impatient and getting terribly frustrated that I can't get a shot
I've worked the angle down to where our paths are crossing at 40 to 60 degrees
What you want ideally is zero to 10 with the enemy either moving almost directly away or coming almost straight at you
Anything over 30 degrees. It's almost pointless to shoot with a fixed sight
Of course these same numbers this same geometry problem are probably running through the mind of the meserschmitt pilot
I'd been considered a rather good marksman in the p39 and t6 at both our gunnery school and later at the rafs
Now i've flown nine missions triggered my guns only once and still have no kills, but i'm cocky enough to try something bizarre
I decide to pull my sights through the german keep pulling my nose up until i can't see him then fire
Hose him and hope against all odds that he flies through the stream. What the hell worth a try?
I pull up and fire off a quick stream of tracer as he disappears underneath me
And another for luck. I ease the stick back and he flies back into my view hot damn
Hot damn. He's spilling coolant back into his slipstream. I got him
Got a goddamn golden bb on him
Punctured his radiator or severed a coolant line got my first kill
And while i'm whooping like i just scored the touchdown that won the rolls bow rolls bowl
He throws the canopy off and bails out
His 109 goes straight in
exploding
That's your first kill right there
Still putting a smile on your face
You haven't read the rest about there. Well, yeah after this a guy sneaks up on you, but luckily it's it's another p51, right?
Yeah
Yeah, uh, what happened afterwards
I felt
Oh, you know, I got a here's a guy. He's flying close formation with me right now. He pulled right up there
pretty quick after the
the kill
How do you down low he had his mask off and he was grinning and he gave me something like that, you know, or
I don't know. I didn't and I thought wait a minute
Did he shoot that thing down out from under me? You know
And I thought I my shot had to be the luckiest shot in the world, you know
to be able to
Blindly get that lead
And then see him come through
So all the way home I
I convinced myself. I probably did not shoot that airplane down that he got it
And it was Johnny England England Air Force Base. That was the guy that the base was named for
And so I get home. He's in a different squadron
and I
Get home
I make a claim to the intelligence
Officer briefing
And then I said but just hold it. I got to go get confirmation from a
Guy that's obviously saw what was going on
So now I'm riding uh
Going in the jeep or to the officer's club and can you tell who the other pilot is or you just know what squadron he is
No, I know who he was. Oh, so you could see him. You're that close to him. You look at
Oh, yeah, I got his mask and I could see his
The name on his airplane. He already had two kills
and so
I think how am I going to bring this up?
You know, am I going to say hey you asshole?
Did oh, you could you could bleep this out
You're good. You're good. We're amongst friends
I I asked, oh, did you shoot that thing down out from under me?
um
Or you know, just how am I going to
Put it to him
So I go in the officers club and he's over here
He sees me and he comes running over to me
And he says Andy
He says that was the best shot I've ever seen. You got that guy out there about 60 degrees angle off
I said, oh Johnny
Lucky shot
And as soon as we were through I rushed to my phone and I got my first kill. There you go
Did you guys put the did you guys put the the swastika on your plane the little mini swastika for a kill very quickly very quickly?
Oh, that's awesome
uh
You got a section in here
um
That it's about another dogfight and I I believe it's probably the one you remember the best you
It's called the straight up encounter. Oh, yeah
And I've got to read this. This is just an incredible
um
Situation here and I'm going to go to the book
I am in this steep climb
Pulling the stick into my navel making it steeper steeper
And I'm looking back down over my shoulder at this classic gray
Me 109 with black crosses that is pulling up to steeper steeper the pilot trying to get his nose up just a little bit more
And bring me into his sights
There's nothing distinctive about the aircraft no fancy markings
Nothing to identify it is the plane of an ace as as one of the dreaded yellow noses like you see in the movie
Some of them did that I know but I never saw one
And in any event all of their aces weren't flamboyant types who splash plane on their paint on their airplanes to show who they were
He was someone who was trying to kill me is all
So I'm looking back almost straight down now and I can see this 20 millimeter
Canon sticking through the middle of the fighters propeller hub
In the theater of memory. It was enormous
an elephant gun
And that isn't far wrong
It is a gun designed to bring down a bomber one that fires shells as long as your hand
Shells that explode and tear big holes in metal
Is the single most frightening thing I have seen in my life then and now
But I'm too busy to be frightened
And I am extremely busy up here
Hanging by my propeller going almost straight up full emergency power
Which a Mustang could do for only so long before losing speed
shuttering
Stalling and falling back down and I am thinking that if the Mustang stalls before the Messerschmitt stalls
I have had it
I look back
And I can see that he's shuttering on the verge of a stall
He hasn't been able to get his nose up enough hasn't been able to bring that big gun to bear almost but not quite
I'm a fallen down dead man almost
but not quite
His nose begins dropping just as my airplane too begins shuttering
He stalls a second or two before I stall drops away before I do
Good old Mustang
He is falling away now and I flop the nose over and go after him hard
We are very high by this time six miles and then some and falling very very fast
The Messerschmitt had a head start plummeting out of my range, but I'm closing up quickly
Then he flattens out and comes around hard to the left and starts climbing again as if he wants to come at me head on
Suddenly we were right back where we started
A lot of this is just instinct now things are happening too fast to think everything out
You stay with your right hand and feet
The right hand also triggers the guns with your left you work the throttle and keep the airplane in trim
Which is easier to do than to describe
Any airplane with a single propeller produces torque the more horsepower you have the more prop will pull you off to one side
The Mustang I flew used a 12 cylinder Packard Merlin engine that displaced
1649 cubic inches
That's 10 times the size of the engine that powers an Indy car
It developed power enough that you never applied full power sitting still on the ground because it would pull the plane's tail up off the runway
And the propeller would chew up the concrete
With so much power you are continually making minor adjustments on the controls to keep the Mustang and its wing mounted guns pointed straight
It's a little unnerving to think about how many things you have to deal with all at once to fly combat
So the mischish mid is coming around again climbing hard to his left and I've had about enough of this
My angle is a little bit better this time
So I roll the dice instead of cobbling it like before and sailing on by him
I decide to turn hard left inside him knowing that if I lose speed and don't make it I probably won't get home
I pull back on the throttle slightly
I pull back on the throttle slightly put down 10 degrees of flaps and haul back on the stick just as hard as I can
The nose begins coming around
slowly slowly
Hot damn. I'm going to make it. I'm inside him pulling my sights up to him
And the German pilot can see this
This time it's the mesheshmit that breaks away and goes zooming straight up engine at maximum power without much alternative
I come in with full power and follow him up and the gap narrows swiftly
He is hanging by his prop not quite vertically and I am right there behind him
And it is terribly clear having tested this theory less than a minute ago that he is going to stall and fall away before I do
I have him
He must know that I have him
I bring my nose up he comes into my sights and from less than 300 yards I trigger a long merciless burst from my brownings
Every fifth bullet or so is a tracer leaving a trail of thin smoke marking the path of the bullet stream
The tracers race upward and find him the bullets chew at the wing root the cockpit the engine
making bright little flashes
I hose the mesheshmit down the way you'd hose down a campfire methodically from one end to the other not wanting to make a mistake
The 109 shakes like a retriever coming out of the water throwing off pieces
He slows almost stops as if parked in the sky his propeller just wind milling
And he begins smoking heavily
My momentum carries me to him. I throttle back to ease my plane alongside just off his right wing
Have I killed him? I do not particularly want to fight this man again
I'm coming up even with the cockpit
Cockpit and although I figure less I know about him the better. I find myself looking in spite of myself
There's smoke in the cockpit. I can see that and nothing more
Another few feet
And then he falls away suddenly left wing down right wing rising up obscuring my view
I am looking at the 109's sky blue belly the wheel wells twin radiators grease marks
Streaks from the guns the black crosses
I am close enough to make out the rivets
The mesheshmit is right there and then it is gone just like that rolling away and dropping its nose
Falling almost straight down leaking coolant and trailing flame and smoke so black and thick it has to be smoke or oil
It simply plunges headed straight for the deck no spin not even a wobble no parachute
And now I am wondering
His ship seems a death ship
But is it
Undecided I peel off and begin chasing him down
Did I squander a chance here? Have I let him escape? He's diving hard through
He is diving hard enough to be shedding his wings harder than anyone designed those airplanes to dive
500 miles an hour and more and if 109's will stall sooner then the Mustang is going straight up
Now I am worrying mate that maybe their wings stay on longer
At 25,000 feet I begin to grow nervous
I pull back on the throttle ease out of the dive and watch him go down
I have no more stomach for this kind of thing and right now
Not right now not with this guy
enough
Let him go and to hell with him
Straight down he plunges
From his highest 35,000 feet
Through this beautiful crystal clear may morning toward the green on green checkerboard fields
Leaving a wake of black smoke
From four miles straight up I watch as the mischersmith and the shadow
It makes on the ground rush toward one another
And then finally
Silently
They merge
I think I just found a guy for my my audio book
I know how you feel
That's just um
Yeah, Dave what's your breakdown of that it's give us give us a breakdown. I I'm actually just
I'm kind of at a loss for words and I know this sounds maybe even sounds a little arrogant
I can picture what he's saying. So even when he's talking about
He you're right here
Sir, even when you're when you're talking about looking down your wing lines seeing his nose come up to you and you know
If he's got two or three more degrees on you, which is which is kind of like a matter of inches really in an airplane
that he's gonna get
That this measurements gonna get a shot
And the the sinking feeling that comes with seconds later the elation of watching him shudder and you know that he can't keep his turn
even the angles and the fault so
Your ability to get another pilot to see through their eyes what you're seeing
Is it is it is remarkable how well it is written in a way to describe it
So I can feel what you're seeing not just see it
It is just unbelievable to listen you describe that
And then the shadows you know merging with the airframe and then at your altitude
It's probably a fireball, but you don't hear anything
And everything in between there is just
I have never seen something written
Well enough to see it with my own eyes as what you wrote in that dogfight
Um, it's it's really amazing for me to hear and I'm really grateful that you have the ability to get that on paper and capture that forever
We may uh
blame
Joe hamlin. Yeah, well
He didn't fly the airplane. I know that well the stories are all mine
And when it came to
Oh, well, we first had to get together
And he'd go home and write
A couple of chapters and then we would
Come back and review them and I said Joe this word isn't even in my inventory
You know and uh
We'd go on and on like to say I don't even know what that means
and
We had that and then when it came to the flying
He would try it and I said
Joe give me a yellow pad over there
And I'd write it all out in the long hand
I said don't change a word
And but after we got together so many times
He really got into my head
Yeah, he did a marvelous job
And uh and then
Even when I said don't change your word sometimes he'd try
And I might or might not
Leave it because he
He was he is a good writer
Absolutely, I would have taken my book and say
I was born on January 13th 1922 blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah you know
But you know the way he mixed
Mixed it through the book, right? I think was really good. Yeah, no, that's so that's the just for everyone that's listening
That's the the the co-author of the book that helped write the book
Joe Hamlin did a great job
When when you're so when you're looking over your shoulder at this measuresmith
And they're start he's starting to stall
So you can see that you can see the plane start to kind of shake I said
I
Seem shutter right but
I don't think you can see it shutter shutters a feel in the airplane. You know you feel
But there's some visual thing that's going on that you go. Oh, he's not gonna make it much
Sloppy he got sloppy, you know, that's the beginning of a stall
And that's the beginning of a stall and you can probably sense when you're about done
Going up too. So you knew that you were close. Oh, yeah
And then when you're shooting
That that aircraft
You have to make little micro adjustments with your nose to get like you're saying you hose it down like you would a campfire
So you're making little tiny adjustments to kind of sweep up and down on that aircraft with your
maneuvering. Yeah, you know maneuvering was maneuvering is just a little bit of rudder
Yeah
Small amount you had to keep it in trim
And I don't what I mean in trim keep the ball centered
If you had a ball off
Then you're you know, you're shooting
And the airplanes over here
You can't you gotta you can't
Oh, so this makes whereas normally you could get away with having trim be off a little bit because you're still just maintaining some kind of a bearing
But in this situation if your trim is off a little bit your guns pointed in the wrong direction might might be you know
And you've got you're making these constant micro adjustments and I actually
That's a part of the book that I didn't quite go into the
Level of detail that you have to do to keep that trim
But I failed to understand why that's so important in a gunfight when you have fixed sights
Because like if you're flying an aircraft, I mean I've taken off an air small airplanes before where there's a strong crosswind
The plane is going if you look at the heading of the plane. It's like 10 degrees off the direction you're heading
But you're still going in the right direction
So if you do that with your gun that's going to be a problem
So you've got to keep that thing perfectly trimmed all the time
Dave you didn't have to do any of that. Well, he had a computer doing all this for him, sir
Well, we we got the early computers
You had it harder than I did because in a jet moving the throttles in a jet doesn't change your trim
Every time you move the throttle on a propeller you change the torque
Every movement of a throttle and I have a little bit of propeller time
I learned to fly on a propeller airplane every time you move the throttle forward or back you have to adjust the rudder trim
So when he talks about the ball, we called it stepping on the ball
Which is a little literally a little gauge that has a little white
background in a little black floating ball that would tell you if your nose and tail are aligned
It'd be like pointing a gun with your wrist cocked in one direction or another
Every time I move the throttle on the jet the computer said we're okay. Don't worry about it
The ball is always centered every time in a prop prop you have to either use your feet or use the rudder trim
So when he's talking about
Moving the throttle what he's not saying is that every single movement of that throttle meant moving my feet
Moving with my thumb moving my hand. So the the intricacy to be able to track
An me 109 that's probably what 30 feet long and 30 feet wide
We're the the the accuracy to do that is so precise to be able to do that in a dogfight like that is so hard to do
I got the kernel here. It was like the humblest guy in the world saying Joe's a good writer, which I know he is
But he didn't track that any 109 with his p51
The way that you did so I still just it's remarkable that you're able to capture that and and I'm trying to do justice to how
How difficult that is and how intricate that physical movement is in your airplane
Also, the fact that you describe this one-on-one engagement that's something that I always loved as a fighter pilot
Was ultimately at the very end what it would come down to you and somebody else
But what's hard for for me to really truly grasp is that there's a war going on around you
You weren't the only two airplanes in the sky at that time
So your ability to compartmentalize and focus on this one airplane as part of a much larger thing going on is
To me equally as remarkable and the thing is is that
what we call
situational awareness
You have to do that. You have to know
And I've got a real good example of when we were doing a dogfight
I saw a shadow
and
When we were through I said hey guys, do you see anything shadow or anything? No, no, no
Okay, come on down get lined up here. I said I knew it was going west generally speaking and
So I go along here
Pretty soon
We come up and I see the shadow again
Before I can see the airplane
And that was a bright sunny day, you know, it was a green hungry
Camel
And if it'd been hazy I never would have seen him
And so I come up and that's a hunk of 111 K
Poor guy
all obsolete
Battle of Britain bomber
and
We had a gunner we silenced the gunner
And we got both engines spoken
And so I scored my I bumped back over here on the
From this side to that side
And I'm scoring them as they as they shoot
So that's how you get a quarter of a kill
share the whole thing
And my number four guys a new head, you know new
inexperienced guy and he
He fired every round on one pass
And you could imagine where the bullets were going
He burned the barrels out, you know
And we only had 30 seconds of
of
Gunfire
Yeah, that's not not much. I know
He come home a couple of times with no ammo
How many seconds do you fire with that mesh which made on the in the straight up encounter?
Three four five seconds something something like that. Yeah, that's still a lot of rounds to receive
I don't want to be the receiving the 50 cows
Uh you go on here
Talking about that straight up encounter you say Eddie Simpson joins up with me both wingman two
Simpson my old wingman and friend had gotten the one who'd climbed out. This is another aircraft
We bagged three or four three of the four. We were very excited. It had been a good day
I had lived and my opponent had died
But it was a near thing
It could have been the other way around just as easily and what probably made the difference was the airplane I flew
Made in America
I would live to see the day when people would try and tell me that the United States can't make cars like some other folks do
What a laugh
I didn't wonder if I just made a new bride a widow or if he might have kids any more than I would have wondered about a snake's
mate in offspring
I may have given some thought to how many of my friends he had killed or I might have or he might have killed in the future
Or how many bombers he might have shot down had he lived
But that's as far as it went
From what I could tell he hadn't been overly concerned about me
People ask about that all the time people usually ask it hesitantly as tactfully as they can but they ask it
Did I wonder and worry about the mothers and children's and wives of the men I shot down?
Did I carry any guilt or regret?
No
Not then and not now
World war two was a total thing
Us against them when being against them was unquestionably the right thing to be
I flew from my country and was proud I could help in any way that I could
Besides all of my opponents were trying to kill me
And frankly I always was elated they hadn't
This one had almost gotten a beat on me. He'd come as close as anyone would
When it was done
480 hours of combat flying in p-51s and another 25 missions are so in vietnam almost all of those in f-105s
I never once suffered a hit in air-to-air combat
The sum total of the damage all my aircraft absorbed amounted to one small arms round
That found one of my wings during a strafing run after d-day
It bored a hole the size of my little finger
It didn't even go all the way through just punctured the underside skin
Nobody noticed it until the next day needing a patch the size of a coin
That's exactly what my crew used a british shilling
People on the ground often shot at me flak batteries machine gunners foot soldiers with rifles and pistols
There may have been some who threw rocks who can say
But this man on that day was the only opponent who was ever behind me and he couldn't quite bring me into his sights
And he never did fire
To my knowledge I was never I never was fired upon by an airplane in combat
Skill had something to do with that. I suppose
But there was certainly something more to it than skill
Lots of hot pilots never came home
I guess I was lucky
or blessed
Yeah, that american made p-51
Was just next level in the sky, huh?
When you guys were getting that thing it must have seemed like you know a lot of times for me, you know, I grew up
I grew up the
The p-51 was like an antique right it was like an antique thing
But for you guys this was like a piece of
The newest technology imaginable
Just a just an incredible bird
I mean Dave
That's like you getting into an f-22 or an f-35 for the first time. It is
I can't imagine, you know
Certainly the the prominence of that air is just so much better
The the prominence of that airplane, but it had to feel good to know
And I fully appreciate and I'm so glad you wrote about it
What it always came down to was the man in the in the cockpit. That's the ultimate
Factor, but it had to feel good to know
You were getting into an airplane
That was gonna
Level the playing field or give you an advantage over what the Germans had so you didn't have to mitigate
The deficiencies of that p-39 or something else
It had to be a confidence builder to say if you want to go fight me one to one
Any in up down left right any environment this airplane will be just fine. So
That feeling of getting into that p-51 knowing you're going to war had to be a lot better than what you might have been flying in anything else
And I felt that when I got in my first fight in f-22
I felt like
I'll fight anybody anywhere. How did that happen? How did you?
Be a marine. How would you do that if I can steal a line from your book?
I was very lucky
Yeah, a lot of timing a lot of just good fortune a lot of things just aligned the right place right time need
requirements
Qualifications and at the end it's really hard for me to take credit for being the only marine that's gotten to do it
But I was very lucky. You're the only marine that got to fly the f-22 ever
And the f-35 those marines that fly f-32. Yeah, I was the first marine only only marine to ever fly the raptor
First marine to fly the f-35 be you know as operational. How'd you get how'd you get in the raptor?
Short version of a long story the Marine Corps was going to buy
F-35s is a whole new airplane. They didn't know
How challenging it would be to go from old to new we hadn't done it in 30 years
The Air Force had just introduced a new fighter called the f-22 to replace the f-15
And they basically sent a spy go live with the Air Force for three years and learn all the lessons that they've just learned
From going from the f-15 to the f-22
We'll take those lessons and apply it as we replace the f-18s with the f-35
So I got lucky to be selected for an exchange with the Air Force
To learn all about the f-22 all about this new generation and all about the challenges of replacing a 30 40 year old
airplane with the brand new airplane because the marine Corps hadn't done it since the early 80s
And I was the guy that got to do it and I went straight from the f-22 to the f-35
Lucky yeah, you two need to play the lottery
So look I'm I I'm not going to read the whole book. You know, you've got a bunch of other encounters in here
dogfights
Incredible detail on the combat experience. You end up with 16 kills 16 and a quarter 16 and a quarter
That's right. Don't let me leave off that quarter
What what was the quarter for was the quarter for that one that you just described? Yeah, so there you go
You got a little bit of that one too
You end up with 16
Kills you find you fly your last mission with Jaeger
You guys are out there together. Okay
um
And again people get the book. It's incredible get those details
But I'm gonna go back. I'm gonna skip forward a little bit here
and you say
I hadn't intended to get married. It just kind of happened
I landed in the states on february 1st 1945 and married my pen pal
the widow elinor cosby stacker 22 days later
It took me a few days to get from the east coast to california and I know I asked her at least a week before we got married
Figure it out. The courtship lasted no more than 10 days to two weeks pretty intense
We were married three days before chuck and glennis
It didn't sit all that well with our folks our moms didn't think it would last and you can understand why
After we've been married about 20 years with our two kids almost grown
My mother poured it all out to elinor. She told her I thought you'd run home to mama at the first sign of trouble
I couldn't have been more wrong. You're a wonderful person. They had a good cry
At another time el's own mother told her the same
Ellie had been married to jack for two weeks and had mourned 15 months people thought she was vulnerable
But she knew her own heart
After 40 plus years. We're still happily married. No question. She's the best thing that ever happened to me
Over the years. We've seen lots of couples break up
Loving a fighter pilot is like loving a cop. He leaves work in the morning and you're never entirely sure he will come home at night
Worse there are inescapable
Inescapable agonizing periods of separation where the woman has to be both father and mother to the children
Keep the house together manage the money and contend with the loneliness
And there never is much money
But we can look back and laugh now
Surviving the trials is what brings people closer
I ended up with 70 years
She passed away
And uh
That's not in the
That's a updated version, isn't it?
I'm not sure which version is. I know I have two versions here. Let me see the cover
The cover to this one
I think this is the original one. I think this is the updated one. Oh, okay. Yeah, I have both versions
Well, actually one of them's dave's version that he's had for 20 years or something
What can I say about that the storybook romance, right? Right?
No, it's um and then well
What was like coming home and you I didn't mention this. It's in the book
I came home for a little bit of leave in between and you got treated like the biggest hero in the history of America. Yeah
Which is awesome
But when you're now you come home again
For good for for good so to speak
Well, yeah, what you didn't know it would be for good. Maybe you would be going to japan or whatever
But germany surrendered while you were back in america, right and
So so how did that feel? Did you feel like we did it?
I've
I was pretty elated
mm-hmm
And you mentioned this in the book and I think it's definitely worth talking about so
The 357th
Who you are part of shot down 609 enemy aircraft
13 died in training
57 were killed in combat and that was from 16 accidents and then the others were killed in shot
And there was 71
POWs
taken
You had 28 original pilots in your crew in your group
Nine of whom were killed seven of whom were shot down and became POWs
Yeah 50 percent
Oh
You must have felt very lucky to be home
Um
But then it's like you're you're looking at japan, right? You had to be looking at japan like everybody else. Yeah
It was always there. Yeah
But but you ended up going to texas and did you become a flight instructor?
Was that your job in texas? Yeah, but I had a lot of group, you know
um
I had a group of instructors
and uh, I'm the I'm the
group commander
And I ride the I have to ride the
I go to the
Instructor school the central instructor school then come back
And they only let me write do the wash rides
What's a what's a wash ride?
Tell a guy he's not gonna
Make it. Oh, you're washing him out
guys
Uh, and then it's
Next thing happens is so you're there working as an instructor and the next thing happens is vj day
Yeah, and now the war is over. Yeah
What was it what was the uh state what was the mindset of america on vj day?
Uh just
I don't know how to explain it but uh extreme joy
And I don't think there's any remorse
From a service man that served in that time about the use of the atomic bomb
And I really
true when
He he did a good job. Yeah. Yeah
No doubt about that and especially when you hear the stories from the guys that fought in the pacific
On the ground against the japanese. I mean it was going to be absolutely
horrendous if we had to go into mainland japan
yeah, and
You know, they were we know they were training their kids
and the women to fight with sticks
and hiding caves
And
We would have just wiped them out. Yeah, we would kill more japanese and then
Americans, yeah
Um
So now that the war is over you you go and become a recruiter going for going recruiting duty
Everybody's getting out
Uh
Yeager becomes a test pilot and it seems like he eventually recruits
Basically recruits you to become a test pilot. Well, he allowed me to he got me a interview with the head of a flight test
Uh
You got a cool section in here during these test pilots a year test pilot years. Um
Scary scary and I kind of wanted to
Bring out the fact of what it was like being a test pilot because it was risky business back then
Um, this section here you say on april 24th
1953 we took off in rendezvous with the b29 and a couple of chase planes at 25 000 feet
In the chase aircraft were jake knight and bill ross the pilot scheduled to join john on the project
I moved in on the b29
Hooked onto its wingtip and again the dash panel light remained dark. No power damn
Thoroughly frustrated by now
I disconnected moved away from the mothership and davis moved in and hooked up
So this was what you were trying to do what what we were trying to do as a country
was get away to make the fighters be able to support the bombers longer and they devised some kind of system where you could actually take two fighter planes
And hook into the wings of a big giant bomber that has a bunch of fuel and they're they would kind of pull you along
Well, that that was one
one um
Concept that uh
People latched on to
but the basic program
Was a theory by this german engineer that we brought back from world war two
Uh to work work in right field
And he theorized that you take a
bomber
If you could put a wing extension out here just a wing extension
And you had some way of controlling it
You increase the aspect ratio
And that give you longer range
And so they wanted to do it in a wind tunnel but they didn't have the priority and all that stuff so
uh
I said well, let's
Let's try it with airplanes
Well, that was okay except we haven't done that before
And so that's why we developed the program with a c-47 and a little q-14
And with a uh simple
Locking mechanism like back again back again to it
And then the drag would hold us it was a beveled ring
Then we had a bevel ball with a with a dump bevel
with a spike
And it you had to go in front of it back end
Which made about twice as hard
and then
it was
locked when you pulled the throttle back
But then if you wanted to get out just
have throttle to it
So as you're trying to do this you're you try bringing your plane in you connect
But you're not getting the full connection
And so then i'm going back to the book autopilot coming on he radioed so this is after davis moved in and hooked up
This is a completely different project. Okay. Yeah, so what project is this one?
This was
Using two f-84s two airplanes one on each wing that was going to be the panel right
And we hadn't gone through the manual flying of it
and
Done enough to give them confidence
to go to an automatic pilot
And uh, meanwhile i'd been
Sorry
I'd been uh
I'd been there about five years which was
way more than normal
and uh
I wanted to stay there and I told him I say this project's coming up
Uh, the only other guy that can do it is john davis. He's been flying along but just flying
I flew the data ship
That got all the data on you know angles and speeds and
And john was flying another airplane manually
Just a standard fighter
And so I could never get power
This was something like the fifth
fifth time
and
Everybody was getting nervous, you know, they wanted progress
Look and the contractor was a low bidder on the autopilot
um
And I'm in the Pentagon now. I got a new boss
And he's pissed off at me because I'm going away flying
They ask him
To let me go
I should have told them a stick it was
So they didn't they didn't see much
Desire and keeping me there when I was when I knew this was coming up
But they want the most experienced guy to make the first few flights and then turn it over to
Check out some other guys
and uh
Now you're you're you're you're coming up on the bad part. Yeah, so
So basically you had gone in to try and see if you could get it to work
It didn't work. You didn't get the connection. You didn't get the um
The power that you were supposed to get when you connected up to the bomber. Yeah, and so you break off
and then davis comes in and he hooks up
And and he I'll go to the book now autopilot coming on he radioed and I knew he would be trying to
Set some kind of record for turning a switch on and off
And then his airplane
abruptly pitched up and over and smashed upside down onto the wing of the b29
I saw the explosive bolts of fire if a certain angle between the wings works was exceeded
They were to fire automatically blowing the connection apart, but it didn't matter
It all happened too fast
the spasm reaction of an autopilot far out of phase through the f84
Over onto the bomber like the cover of a book slammed shut
There was no time for anything not even a call on the radio
The outer panel of the bomber's left wing peeled upward
From the wingtip almost to the outboard engine and then the f
f84 fell against the main spar the impact sheared the jets nose away
Cleanly just in front of the cockpit the fighter bounced off and fell away in a glide
I remember yelling for john to get out, but I got no response
The bomber nosed over and with the most
With most of the wing gone fell into
big power spiral and augered almost straight in
It wouldn't have been the simplest thing in the world to get out of pointed almost straight down inspiring
And spiraling tightly and pressurized which would have made getting a door open even more difficult
Earlier flights had been flown without pressurizing the cabin guarding against exactly this sort of incident
But everything had gone so well flight after flight
That's somewhere along the line the b29 crew had decided such precautions weren't necessary
In the final seconds just before the bomber crashed into the bay one of the crew of five struggled free
But he was too low by the by then and there wasn't enough time for his parachute to come all the way open
Moments later the fighter burrowed into a forest throwing up a huge fireball
Six men were dead one a close friend because engineers programming the autopilot had erroneously assumed the b29's wing to be rigid
And because there wasn't an instrument to warn us of
To warn us how out of phase the autopilot might be
And because there were too many people involved in the project and because everybody was probably too much in too much of a hurry
And because no one had fought up computers which probably could have worked out out the settings
And because of Curtis LeMay had said keep working on it
And of course because I hadn't said it's too damn tough at a time when saying it was almost certainly would have killed the project
In war when death is all around a man can steal himself against it block out the heartbreak press on
But this wasn't wartime and maybe I'd let my guard down
Maybe of all the things that have happened to me in my life. This probably hit me the hardest
I was a long time getting over it
John Davis was dead and it could have been me probably should have been me
We never did learn why I couldn't draw power from the b29's
So, um horrible incident
Yeah, I have to say
that uh
In all of my 30 years
of service
The hardest thing I had to do
Was
Drive back into the housing section
and tell a
widow that her husband's not coming back tonight
I just uh
I had to do that so many times you'd think I would have coped with it, but
Somehow rather I just
Was very difficult for me to do
Well, there's uh
You know you talk about this in the book. There's a one point where someone comes comes. There's so many accidents happening
someone
comes to do an assessment
of the
the program
And they say there's no evidence of a safety program at edwards like it didn't even exist
And and actually david and I were talking about this you you eventually got tasked with
creating a the safety program there
And david and I were talking about the term buying the farm which everybody knows what buying the farm is
But I think we found the root of that in your book
Was that you guys used to say if you if you die then your your widow is going to get a $10,000 insurance policy
Which is enough to buy the farm or buy whatever you want. So that's where that from from what I know
That's where that term comes from exactly buying the farm
but you get tasked with
coming up with that safety program
And
You know you're you're you're at how long are you at that test pilot program for forever. It's a long time. You got
You got a pretty good story about about uh, yeager in here
I kind of got to read this one
Uh, you you're going to again, there's some background and I'm skipping through the book
So buy the book to get the details chuck was involved in the testing and on one of the flights
This in late 1963. I was practicing instruments in a t33
Just happened to be in the air listening on the radio when chucks chase plane had a problem and had to abort
I piped up and said hey, I'm available
All a chase pilot does is follow as far as he can and then pick the man up coming back
And stand by to help if he's needed. So you're out there just doing a normal flight
Chuck's doing some kind of a test flight and his the person that's supposed to be observing him
Something happens to his plane. Yeah, so yeah, so you say hey, I'm I'm up here. I got it
As I circled in the general area where the nf 104 would return to my altitude. I listened and watched
Chuck made a level run
Then lifted the 104s nose and touched off its rocket
Blasting almost straight up leaving a trail that could easily be seen
At 100,000 feet. I learned later the 104s nose pitched up
Which was always a danger in the starfighter when you ran out of speed and reached a certain critical angle
A device made the stick actually shaking your hand to warn you as you approached this angle of attack
And if you didn't correct then a stick pusher would move the nose down automatically
Instead of stalling at this angle the 104 would pitch up
Gyrate around and fall into a spin you could recover from if you had enough altitude
Only this time the air was too thin for maneuvering and the small thrusters didn't have enough power to force the nose down
Chuck's plane fell into what became a flat spin
Bellied down like a frisbee the kind of spin you can almost forget getting out of
He tried everything to book in the book to recover
He even popped the landing drag shoot trying to get the nose down with no luck
I followed him down from 25,000 feet circling his spinning aircraft as we reached 10,000
I was yelling for him to get out
He fired the rocket powered ejection seat and while I was calling for the chopper to fly out and get him
I watched his parachute billo
I came over low as he landed to see if he was all right
He was lying down and as I flew by he waved
The way he was lying seemed awkward, but I wrote that off to the cumbersome spacesuit
I came by again and he was standing up waving
I circled until the chopper arrived and took him off to the hospital
I was stunned to learn he'd been burned
By the time I got to the hospital his head was swollen as large as a basketball
As he'd ejected the seat had become fouled in his parachute lines
And the pull of his shoot popping open had slammed the seat into chuck
The still hot rocket attached to its underside hit him smack in the face splitting open his helmet his helmet's face plate
The spent rocket was still spitting some flame and it flashed inside his
Split helmet fueled by Chuck's oxygen. He managed to get the face plate open which shut off the oxygen or it might have been worse
As it was his glove caught fire and his face was badly seared
The doctors had to peel away the skin
Daily for weeks. It must have hurt like hell. You can still see the scars though. You have to look closely
So that's a day in the life of the dang fighter test pilots back then
Uh just kind of crazy stuff you guys were doing
Well the cold order was still on
But what he was doing was uh
Trying to set out a new official
Speed uh
Time to climb record and that was especially modified
Uh F104 that they were going to try to use in the test pilot school. He was
Running the test pilot school at that time. So
He was doing some of his own flight testing but
We had already flown the airplane to 100 and
120 something thousand feet and uh
What space isn't space 50,000 feet the what how how how high up is space?
I forget what there there is an official
Yeah, I think it's probably closer to 80 80,000. It's definitely above 50. I've been to 60
Oh, we're just kind of laughable by these standards. It's not space. Is this the scene is this the scene that they show in the in the book
Or in the movie the right stuff and in the book the right stuff
This this scene right here. Are you familiar with that movie the right stuff? Yeah
Is this what they when they portray?
Jaeger crashing and he comes walking out of the fire
And the guy says now, what is that? That's a man
I forgot that
So you spend this time out there
um eventually you get signed
to the
In like 1965 you get assigned to the 18th tactical fighter wing. This is an oka now
Your son meanwhile
Jim goes to the Air Force Academy. Yeah
So I guess he was he was following his father's footsteps. How'd you feel about that?
I was really proud of him. I am proud of him
He's a real good guy
That's uh, that's a pretty amazing story. I took him for a ride in uh
F105 he came to okinawa
Oh, okay. Wait, how old was he when he went for riding on a 105?
Oh
I forget what the academy. Oh, so he was at the academy. Yeah, he was a cadet
And then of course later on
He took me on a combat machine
Okay, well go ahead and tell us that story. I think we already did well. We weren't hit we hadn't hit record yet
And I was only catching pieces of it because I was getting set up
So what happened? How'd you end up doing a combat mission with your son in vietnam? Well?
He when he got out of flying school
He wanted to go to fighters
No, I had B 52's, you know
Long down
And so he finally decided well if I can't get fighters I might as well go to vietnam
So he went to a special operation squadron
This was on the
choose list
And flying an old two
Which is a push puller
Uh, a Cessna 337
standard 337 modified for
special operations and
Then shortly after he got there I got assigned to talk Lee in thailand
105s
in the sassy Asian war
and
The seventh air force was having a all commanders
Meeting in in Saigon
And so he'd live he was at benoise so right next door
So I called him and I said hey, maybe we could get together, you know
And then he comes back with
Hey, you want to go into combat mission with me?
I
Says you got to be kidding
You'll never get that permission to do that
And I certainly would not have permitted it in my wing
And uh, so he says stand by and on he's a new guy
And stand by
And he's gonna come back all it seemed like a minute later. He says it's all set
He says
You you come on down to Saigon
I'll pick you up the next morning
We'll go on a combat mission land at benoise spend the night
And then I'll get you back to your
Your baby, you know Saigon meeting
So sure enough
It happens but special operations they do all kinds of stuff and
So he probably picked a
Minimum risk kind of a project
We we went out the
The
The O2 had a loud speaker on it
And they'd go out over communist strongholds and
Publish a
Speak
Most stuff like oh hit him with some psyops some psychological operations. Yeah, that's what I was trying to think
And then we'd go back over the area and
Drop leaflets which gave them safe passage
They could go and you know go up and surrender with it and we would take them up as a
Personer with no
Would then kill them. Um
Well, I'm glad that that approval chain didn't go through your wife because she was not very happy
I I I carry this story
I'm a little overkill when I do it, you know
Oh, you know, I can't I don't have the words I can't describe
What it means to me to be able to fly with my
Son in a combat mission. I certainly wouldn't let anybody
Do it in my organization
and
Then I go on I say but my word my wife had a few words to say about it
She's damn glad she didn't know about it until it was all over
I
Um
Yeah, speaking of like flying with your friends and whatnot
Uh, you had a little reunion
In vietnam as well. Here's another one. You got chuck. Yeager chuck said well
We flew our last combat mission in world war two together. We might as well fly our first combat mission in southeast asia together
That morning we served as a crew for one of several bombers on a close support mission
Making one run after another over an endless green jungle
A forward air controller on the ground with a radio gave us targets
And we dive in 30 degrees pretty steep for a plane of that size toggle away a single bomb
Then fly back around and let go another over and over again ever so carefully trying to put them right where the troops wanted them
Again we stayed the night and partied with friends. So you got to do ops with with Yeager again in vietnam
Eventually you end up with um
Eventually you end up with the you become the commander of the 355th tactical fighter wing
And you're flying the f105
Uh funder chief which dav told me
Is is called the thud
And how'd you like that bird?
Well, you I don't know what thud means. Oh, okay. Dave gave me some bad intelligence. You didn't call it thud
Now it got that name from
crashes
In the development of the airplane got it and after
After it was deployed even the first few years
And I remember when I went to the um
18th wing
They were putting in safety pack 19 and 20 and 21
God
It had a terrible reputation, but
I have to say
About the 105
Once we got all the bugs worked out on it
It was a very reliable airplane
And it made a good bomber
You didn't want a dog fight with it except with another 105
Uh, they called it that fb, you know a fighter bomber
I flew a tour
Or a part of a tour in southeast asia with it
After we'd not quit going north
We were just bombing the Ho Chi Minh trail. Uh
You talk about that uh deployment to vietnam
And what that was like
Uh, it's I mean we had pretty good air superiority compared compared to when you were fighting the luft wafua over france
Hey, hell, that's for sure
Um
And and eventually your jets get sent home
Because you had a bad relationship
If something happened with the tai government because you were in tai land and something what what something went wrong there
Oh, no, it wasn't um
It was near the end of the war
And so they decided to to send the strike thuds, you know the ones making the bombing strikes
Send one of the groups home
And unfortunately it it was my group
I got in a pentagon
When I left okinawa, I thought
I'm combat ready in the airplane
Next logical place is to go to southeast asia, but I'm a bird colonel
And those assignments are more difficult good good assignments
Uh
I said no you're going to the pentagon
I didn't want to do that
And I guess my grumblings
Got down to the colonels assignments somewhere and so
I got a call he says hey we got a need for a
Colonel who's been a wing commander who's checked out in the equipment
Uh and your name flashed out
I said yeah, that's what I wanted to do when I left okinawa, you know
And I said well if you want to take it you can take it
I'll take it
and uh
Um
Then he said well I got to tell you something bad about it
It may close while you're there
Maybe shut down good
Send the wild weasel airplanes home
No keep them
And send the strike eagles strike
Not eagles the fuds strike that's home
So nobody knew what to do the uh state department said oh you cannot close that wing at this moment
And uh we went in there with a just a handshake
We didn't normally when you go into a foreign country
You have a status of forces agreement
where they give you example cases like uh one of your truck drivers kills a
A tie in an accident what do you do?
And we didn't have any of those
We went in they ties wanted us in and we we wanted in so we went in
Anyway, uh
We got all these things the ties wanted uh
Everything they wanted everything including the airplane
But uh when the time came
We start shutting down
But still with no uh
No, uh
No end date, you know when did we when did we shut down right?
State department was the was the problem there
And Christ's ties were still
Shipping us bombs, you know driving the
truckloads of bombs
They go through the tie gate and get the cum shaw, you know
And they didn't want to turn off the bombs so they're they're bringing them to us
We're stacking them in the road
You know the shelters are all filled
So we're stacking them in the goddamn roads in the
Jesus just
You know violation or regulation after regulation
And uh
Not having any luck at that
got a
Seven to the force
seventh Air Force
The assistance team came to visit us
Help us shut down
And so I said well, we only need one thing
Giving a date a shutdown operation
Well, we can't do that right now
Well, you could stop the bombs from coming in
The four star turns to the colonel and he says
Take care of that
And we got the bombs shut down
And I'm still on date
And uh
I learned I learned a few things during this period of time
It was I'm going home to mandatory retirement
And uh
I won't tell that story. Let's see
They offered you a billet and Saigon and you said, nah
I'm not going to sit around here. I'm a oh after yeah, yeah after they shut it down. Yeah, we're still closing the base down
Oh, I can tell you that. Okay. I'll tell this to you
Yeah
Yeah another meeting but I think it was the same meeting that I went down there to fly with you
And this
young brigadier general there was
in operations
Was was at this dinner and
Uh, something came up about me going to the headquarters
And he pipes up. Yeah, I've got chose you. It'll be good for your career
So I said in the loudest voice I could
Gracefully do
Oh, then you know, I go home to mandatory retirement
Yeah, really good for my career
God damn
So
You end up going uh, go ahead
I
On closing base
I said, uh
I took I had seven full kernels
I said, it's you you
Close you make a plan to close your function
You know from day one if I tell you
How many days?
weeks whatever
Does it take you to shut down?
And so I said every one of you do that and then give it to me
I put them all together added two months
and picked the date
And uh
Then I decided to put it in a telegram
To all ships at sea and everybody I could think of
And state department everybody
And title
Closure clothes of
Closure of tockley plan something like that
And I sent that thing and then sat back
And I had no idea what I was going to get
And oh, oh christ we got a plan
And it worked like
It it it like we're like magic. Yeah, we call that leading up the chain of command. We're gonna make this happen
Jesus christ
Yeah, everybody was so happy except the
Except the state department, but I learned a lot of things about
Waste in government
So we tried to get rid of everything we had and it
What didn't we could went into the trash
And went to the ties
And
So
Oh
One morning they came and told me hey, we got a dead tie officer in the
such and such building
It was one of the buildings we were
Cleaning up, but we had not turned over to the ties yet
But
And he was in there tearing out the electric wire
Electrocuted himself
They were you know selling it
But about about to trash so
Steel lockers
Labor intensive to tear up tear down very heavy
If I tore down
Torm down
Shipped him home. Nobody would have said a word, but it would have cost like hell
But if I put him in the dump
Aha government waste look at this
But what we did was
The
South Vietnam
How that created they needed them badly
So I said well you send somebody over here and dismantle them and get your c-130s
I got tons of them
And so we got rid of most of them that way and some of them did make it to the dump, but
It was a hell of a lot cheaper than
packing them up and sending them home
And nobody would complain. There you go. You got to find those solutions. Yeah
uh
So you end up
getting orders
Back to mcclellan air force base, which is which is about 90 minutes from auburn
Uh-huh, which is where you're from
Uh, this was sort of what we call. I don't know if you call in the navy. We call it a twilight tour
This was sort of your twilight tour. You get put in charge of maintenance. You still get to fly t33. So you're happy about that
But this is sort of this is where you uh end up your career
right
And I'll go to the book here
You say too soon
It was over
There was talk about a big ceremony, but I asked them to forget about that and just mail me my papers
There was a short sweet ceremony in the commander's office
Ellie her folks and my mother were there and that was it
30 years and 30 days from my day of enlistment at age 50. I was a civilian again
Going out in the place where it had all begun
My mother had actually written
The epitaph for my career a bit earlier when I'd flown home from tokli
Well, she said when I walked through the door, are you satisfied now?
I said sure
file it under white lies
Because that's you know, you can never be happy never be satisfied
um
And that was the end of your career
In the in the Air Force you ended up working for mcdonald douglas
Well, they mcdonald aircraft company
Had them later mcdonald douglas got it. They bought them out
uh
It took a few years off from flying, but then you started missing it you started flying again
Uh, you got some great stories in here is when you got
A version of old crow back in one of these
Uh restored
p-51s you got to fly that you got to fly with jager
Again in some of these air shows
um
Just again the stories as as the book closes out and and how it goes and the rest of the stuff you've done just
Great just an incredible story incredible story
How'd you feel that day when you retired?
I had mixed emotions
I know so in the seal teams, you know, you have we call it a drying cage, but it's basically a big locker
Probably the size of a prison cell
But you have all your gear in there all your gear in there that you collect for the years that you're in and I was in for 20 years
But I remember my last day. I got my van downstairs
And I and for me it's kind of similar in that
18 out of 20 years. I was stationed in Coronado in San Diego
All within a hundred yards
Seal team one
Seal team three seal team seven when seal team seven was was in an old building right next to seal team one
And then the training command they're all 100 or 200 yards apart. That's where I spent my whole adult life
And then one day
My last day I retired I went up cleaned out my locker
My last day I retired I went up cleaned out my locker my my gear cage
Through all that stuff in my van and left
And that was a pretty empty feeling when I left because you it's your whole life
Uh, so I'm sure you had some of that when you when you got done. Oh, yeah
um actually
Comment was made that by my mother
was made when I was retired
And after I was retired she said well you satisfied me up now
Well, tell you what this is probably a pretty good place to stop. Um
The book has so much more detailed information in it
You know, it's just an incredible life
Incredible hero and I got to read one more quote from the book. You said
You said all those years
They'd actually paid me to fly
What a deal
It's just uh
Incredible Dave you got anything else?
I'm sure you guys could talk for hours. I'm sure you are
It's this has been
This has probably been one of the best three hours of honestly of my entire life getting to be here and
You know, I'm I'm lucky. Um, I get to work with jaco. I'm on this podcast a bunch and I've gotten to meet so many veterans
And then and then now, you know, this movie top gun just came out again
And it's so prominent and and people ask me all the time
You know, what was the first movie like and I saw that I was 13 when the first movie came out
So as you know at that age when you see something at that young age you look at it and you think man, I really
Want to do that and a lot of times when people ask me, you know, why'd you become a pilot? I think about that movie a lot but
As a little kid, you know much before 13 14 I was reading books
And I remember as a little kid
Reading a book on on pappy boington and and reading a book on on the black sheep squadron. There's a tv show, you know
Long before top gun. I was I was already
I was already enamored
already enamored and it was it was
Jaeger
Anderson
Foss and boington and what I've realized in this podcast as I'm listening to you talk
When I was a little kid
What I wanted to be was you
I wanted to be you
And I can't express how much gratitude I feel and how much reflection I have now is a very little boy
Long before the movie top gun ever came out is what I wanted to be was what you described in this book
And to get to sit across from you and hear you talk about this
Is just an honor of of my lifetime and I can look back now and when people ask me why I wanted to be a fighter pilot
I can tell them that I got to meet the reason why so thank you very much. This has been awesome
Thank you
Yeah, I don't have much to say after that, Dave. Um, I got you know
I
Get asked
You know, what do you what do you tell kids today?
And what I tell kids today is
You know, you really can be what you want to be and there's a good example of it right there
If you want to be something
Really really bad
You can be it
and
I say to kids live your dreams
And uh
Find a
finder something you like to do
And if you can if your job is something you like to do
You can excel in that job
And
Um
Live your dreams
That's that's what I
Say these days
Well, sir, uh, you certainly lived your dreams without any doubt and uh, you know people can find you you got a website
Oh, yeah, same name as the book. It's to fly and fight
Dot com is it dot com yet to fly and fight dot com
So anybody that's interested in hearing more about you hearing more of your story you can go there and
Check that out. I mean, it's just uh, it's incredible. It's an honor to be sitting here
Talking to you and and to have Dave here. Just it's incredible to see
So thank you so much for for joining us
And and making the effort to come out here and of course more importantly
Thank you for your service to our great nation. Thank you for what you did in combat to defend
The world from tyranny and from darkness
And to defend freedom in the world
You fought
machine against machine
And you fought man against man
In the ultimate test of skill
And you won every time
And and that's pretty impressive
And we salute you and we thank you for your service, sir. Thank you very much
And with that bud Anderson has left the building
Dave I feel like I was just turning over to you at this time
I don't know if that's a good idea man
I I need a little time to decompress and kind of contemplate that that was um, I knew that was going to be a unique experience for me, but that was
I don't have a lot of frame of reference to what to compare that to that was and that was unreal for me man
When he just stepped up you were kind of rattling off some of the thoughts that you had in your head
As you were thinking about this
And you're thinking
for instance
A thousand aircraft go out
and
whatever six hours later
Ten percent of those are gone a hundred aircraft crews gone
This is what they did day after day after day after day, yeah
There's like I don't know is there anything equivalent for a fighter pilot to being a world war two fighter pilot
Look the guys in vietnam, obviously they extremely challenging
Uh, you know, uh
horrible situations to go and go and into you know having
Guys like charlie plum and william reeter on on the podcast to talk about their experiences
you know
Surface to air missiles migs out there
Uh, those encounters were
relatively rare
Compared to you're going to bomb germany. You are 100 percent
100 percent gonna get into it. Yeah, this is the next level. Yeah, I don't think from scale like there's nothing
He's talking about
Was it big week? Is that what they called it big week? Yeah first mission thousand bombers 800 fighters and 16
160 germans come up to fight them something like that. So there's 2 000 airplanes in the sky
and
250 bombers don't come home
I don't think there's anything certainly in my aviation mind that's even close to the scale of that
It's just it's hard even for me. It's really hard to relate to what that might look like. It's kind of overwhelming
the heavies
dude
Hey, by the way, they just mentioned this if you want to get the book to fly and fight
go to go to this website. I already mentioned to fly and fight.com
and
bud is signing books so you can get a signed book
from that website and
I would recommend you do it. I mean this guy's a hundred years old right now
Just he the stuff that he's seen in his life lucky to be here
um, just awesome
So if you get the chance and the book by the way, I I read through two dog fights
So there's whatever 14 more and they all have their own little details
They all have their own little scenarios that are happening and and look the rest of the book
There's all kinds of things in there that we didn't talk about
So if you want to hear that story
Go get that book to fly and fight.com
We may have to like once this comes out actually when you listen to this again
Take notes and maybe we'll do sort of a
A wrap up of this and you can kind of talk through some of the stuff and maybe even bring in some stuff
Different stuff from the book if we didn't cover it because I mean you're talking about
Them shooting down German
German pilots that were parachuting and that was just there's a bunch of other things to talk about that we didn't cover here
So when you listen to this take notes and maybe we'll do another sort of a recap
Or an after-actions on this even if it's just like, you know
An hour or four or whatever
Right on we can go through it
Echo Charles you've been here the whole time, but you've been quiet. Yes because you've been uh, you didn't have a mic
Yes, so on purpose. What you know, let's face it. What am I gonna add to well then again? I did kind of have some there
That first dog fight
You know what wait the first one or the one the first one that you read one that he said luck you shot
Yeah, yeah, so I I was
So a lot of people say like oh you should read my audiobook or whatever
But that was the first time where I was like you should read this audiobook
You meaning him or you meaning me you okay? So because and of course the story's laid out like perfect
Right, especially at the end. I don't know why I like the end so much when he was like
Oh, I don't even know if that was my shot
It might have been the other guy shot, you know, and I don't even know how to approach this guy
And then when he found out it was his that was good
Yeah, you know, I didn't I actually didn't read that part so he could kind of tell the story
And it's a weird thing to try and figure like what do you want to read and what do you want to hear from them?
You know and you got about I mean in my mind. I'm always trying to think like I want to give them enough that they go
Oh, yeah, and they get in the zone and then they kind of fill in the deets as they say
But man, you know, it's such an honor to be able to have these guys on and
Hear their stories man. It's just
It's crazy and then you know, you always have to think to yourself
that there's almost 300,000
That didn't come home from this war and that didn't get to tell their story and didn't get to have kids
um, yeah, it's just
So we're so lucky to be able to to have this opportunity to do this so
Appreciate y'all listening and and if you want to support what we're doing here
And you want to support yourself too, which is a bonus. It's true
Some people might even prioritize supporting yourself over supporting what we're doing here
Either way, it's a win because if you support yourself good
We I want you to be stronger and smarter and faster and better
Yeah, it's for one of the functions of this the existence of this whole outfit. I think yeah
So if you want that you can go if you want to support you want to support yourself
You want to support america by the way you can see I kind of got a little fired up when we started talking about the p51 Mustang
The p51 Mustang was like the it was a game changer a game changer
500 miles an hour. It's just faster and stronger and better and it was american made
it was american made and and
Obviously it was american made
But just think of like every detail that the engineering the design the material like all that went into that and that that
That wasn't even an idea on december 7th 1941. That wasn't even an idea. They're just like, okay, cool
We have to build the bet you think well, I actually don't know the history wasn't an idea yet
I
Don't know exactly the development of it. They knew we knew we needed better airplanes
But I don't think anybody certainly in 1941 it could have predicted what the Mustang was going to be
Other than we needed something
Well, I was so fired up listening to talk about the Mustang that I started thinking about the Ford Mustang
Like I just need to get a Ford Mustang because I can't get a Mustang Mustang
I can't get a p51 Mustang, but I get a Ford Mustang
That's an american made piece of machinine legit legit
That's how fired up. I was getting talking about this aircraft
and uh, what they did with it so
America she wants some american made stuff well for hey jockel fuel got jockel fuel.com go get some stuff
Hey jockel fuel. We got all new flavors. I was pounded mine today. Were you pounding yours today, Dave?
How's that new orange? It's so good. Do you think your orange could be better?
I didn't know that it could be better. No, but I know that it's like the p51 Mustang of freaking drinks
It's the upgrade. It's like the new version of the Mustang. It's a little bit better. It's a little bit better
And echo Charles, how are you over there on the mango?
Actually, I got messages saying that that's their new favorite flavor. Oh, so you got people that the mango comes through more
So their old favorite flavor was mango and their new favorite flavors mango. Is that what you're saying?
Their old favorite flavor apparently was not mango
Just guessing what the last one was nonetheless. Yeah, they're all they're all a lot better
They're all a lot better. They're different. They're they're in a different category. So jockel fuel.com get yourself some milk
Get yourself some joint warfare some krill super krill
uh origin usa's look made in america is a thing and peep like you know like bud anderson said people like
Oh, we can't make the stuff over here. I laugh at them
That's what p roberts did when they said hey, you can't make gays in america. He laughed at them
Because guess what we can we have the capability we have the technology we have the skill set we have the will
To get it done
And look you can go buy your you can go buy your your genes. Let's say
From a place that is literally has slaves
You can that's what you can do or you can buy it from america
Where we're on board with freedom
With freedom that's what's happening
And they happen to be the best genes that I own
51 of
You know what I think the next the next modification the next modification or the next version of the genes
I don't even know what they might we might do but
There's going to be some p 51 things coming out. Yeah
And look I get it p 38 love it
Uh corsair love it. You probably love the corsair a lot. I do because you because that's marine core
Or wait, what's your is that your favorite bird world war two when I grow up happy boynton black sheep
Marine core corsairs win in the war in the pacific. Yes. Listen the p 51
Is the iconic world war two fighter and everybody knows it that doesn't mean I don't love the corsair
All the marines out there know what's up, but listen the p 51. That's the machine that won the war in europe
Everybody knows it bro
Sometimes the the p 51 flies like in the vicinity of my house because they'll do the coastal runs
And I can hear them and then you look up the the silhouette
Look the cool thing that's cool
Like it would be a little bit difficult to tell a corsair from the side profile, you know when it's out at a little distance, you know
But a p 51 you see that bottom air scoop you're like there it is
Big daddy's coming home
Uh, so if you want the if you want the p 51 mustang of american made
Gear
Go to originusa.com and get some american made stuff that's going to go out in the world kick ass going to be faster better
Stronger we got hunt gear coming. You probably saw you see me wearing my hunk here
Have you seen the pictures of the camo in the in the in the environment as they say?
So of course they did
Made a big deal out of it made a thing out of it. It was good. Oh, yeah, you made a predator quote
And they like that messed it up though after I really revisited it, but it was good. It passed it landed you got there
All right, so good. It looked good for the first. Yeah, it does. It's awesome
Uh, jockel fuel.com originusa.com jockelstore.com. Yeah, that's what echo made
We well, you know, it was a collaborative effort for sure. But yeah, we got some new stuff on there
What do we got standard issue discipline equals freedom shirts standard issue? There's a layer in there
There's layers in there a couple layers in there and they're optional layers. You don't even have to know the layers to appreciate
That the garment as it were
Um, so yes get that we didn't this is like the what second announcement on the podcast
We made we didn't make the official announcement yet. So oh for the for the standard issue
Standard issue. Yeah, we'll probably announce it like next week or whatever
But if you're hearing this boom get yours before everybody you're already in there
Yeah, also short locker subscription shirt every every week. There's a good one coming two good ones coming
Oh, yeah, you should be the draft of one of them. This is the kind of thing people are gonna want that one
I think you're right about that one. I feel that way
Please tell me there's gonna be something in the future themed on the p51 or something for the short locker
Come on the p51. Look. I like I said the p51 has always been
Up there in my head
But I mean, let's face it. It went next level today
It went next level today. And you know what reading the book
I mean, you think about that you think about your climbing as hard as you can in the aircraft
And you got a meserschmitt 109 by the way, german's world renowned for their engineering and their their efficiency
With their building of their aircraft all my neurons
And you're like guess what I'm from america
Sorry bro, I'm from america. I got a p51 Mustang with what how many of 1100 horsepower something crazy
And we're gonna go you you're gonna hang with me cool. Let's see what you got
Hanging by the propeller. He used that term a couple times hanging by the propeller
You can imagine that thing just trying to grab air and it's just about to run out and that thing's
Freaking epic dude
It's true. Um, yeah, so yeah, there it is short locker. Don't forget that one sign up for that one
Sign up for that one jockelstore.com subscribe to the podcast subscribe to jockel underground.com
People look we don't control these platforms. Look, we talk about freedom a lot
There's some people that are offended by that
They've kicked people off of platforms for what they've said
So we don't want to risk that everything's been cool so far. We hope it continues to be cool
But if it doesn't we have jockel underground.com $8.18 a month if you want to help us build that and maintain that
Check it out. Hey, look if you can't afford that it's okay
We still want you in the game as they say if you can't afford to $8.18 a month to support no factor
Email assistance at jockel underground.com. We got a youtube channel. I'm the assistant director for these youtube videos
Clearly, that's the difference, bro. And I thank you. Thank you for that praise praise
Psychological warfare we got flipside canvas.com Dakota Meyer putting making cool stuff to hang on your wall books for once again
To fly and fight by colonel clearance e bud Anderson
With joseph hamlin as the co-author
Just go to to fly and fight.com order that book up
Check out some of the other books we got we got only cry for the living by holly mckay. That's jockel publishing right there
She she she risked her life to read to write that book
So and it gives you an insight. It's not too often you get the insight of both sides of a war, right?
Not not a historical like hey, this was 100 years or 30 years ago
This is like oh the war is going on right now and we're hearing both sides
So that's what holly did. So order up that book
Final spin I wrote a novel
Look, I've written a bunch of books too. So if you want to get some of the books that I've written
Get some of the books that I've written get about face. I didn't even write it. I wrote the forward on it
I'll tell you what I don't even know sometimes I read that book
And I just think I just my life
Every podcast should just be about another section of about face
There's so many things in there. It's so filled with goodness
That you miss goodness
Right, it's like you walk into a buffet and maybe over in a corner. There's like some some uh
Uh, some little wagyu beef like
Nibblets, right?
Hell yeah, but there's prime rib over there. There's some you know some bacon wrapped hot dogs over
This is like a bunch of stuff. You miss the nibblets, bro
Well, I know more room on your plate kind either that or just overwhelmed with goodness. Yeah, there's goodness everywhere
Maybe they got some mulk like in the containers. You ready to drink, you know, we got ready to drink mulk coming
R.T.D. as they said
I was worried not worried you you you you you you
You want to control your expectations, right? You want to be like look, it's going to be healthy. There's no sugar
Like you know, how can it it's going to be it'll be good, but how good
Dude, it's
Gtg as we say. Yes. It's good to go. E.A.E.
Yeah, all this
It's it's delicious. Yeah, I was comparing it. I will I wanted it to taste as good as a certain
Um, let's say known well-known brand of chocolate flavored drink. We'll say we're there
We're there. All right, that's good. That's good. Yeah, that's interesting. It's outstanding
You imagine drinking something that is completely good for you and it tastes delicious
I don't even have to imagine anymore. Oh, yeah, and and I said this from the beginning
Where my kids like the the you know, there's word kid mokkawara. They like the regular one like the best
They think that's like a treat and I kind of psychologically like train them to know that that's like the treat or whatever
But yeah, and so I know I do a guilt-free, you know
There's something that you can do that tastes so has so much goodness so much
So much immediate gratification and no downside
Short and long-term pain. Yeah, that's kind of a
I guess you could look at jocco fuel from a strategic perspective and one of the consistent
underlying themes of the
products is
Short-term mega gratification taste wise and long-term total goodness across the board health wise. Yeah
That's a thing. It's an anomaly people people don't know what's up with that. It's kind of hard to believe in a lot of ways
Yeah, wait a second as Dave said earlier today. What I should say is you're welcome
Dave's like jocco. You just need to tell people. Oh, here's my drink. You're welcome
Oh, here's mokk. You're welcome. He was not wrong with that. Here's joint warfare taken
You're gonna be able to do things you couldn't do two weeks ago. You're welcome. Oh, but then again, I don't know joint warfare is pills
I know but you're welcome. Yeah
For sure that but yeah, okay. Yeah, the short term that's it
That's like what do you call it? What do you call when it's like normal?
You know something that you don't love but it's like the standard so whatever shut it down echo. Good work
Thanks, man. Do you got any other cool things I'm saying that you want to kill? I'm keeping it. What do you call?
Real like down to earth like for you know, you see him saying nice job
Appreciate it. Okay. Let's just end this freaking echo screwed up. What are you talking about?
It's all true. We're just riding this huge wave and you're like, yeah, but those are pills
Okay, you know what we need to do we're gonna make some chewable
Oh, see right now you're talking that have a really good like lemon lime sort of zing to it tasting good
Okay, remember back in the day old school
Remember those vitamin c wafer 100 things. Okay. See now we're talking this is those vitamin c wafers is is how you end up with
3,500
milligrams
Of vitamin c in your day. Oh, yeah colds are running away from you
And they they taste it kind of like like a special candy 100% you know, oh, yeah, see so that's like the
The avenue to pursue as far as pills go. I don't mean pills. You know what but let's face it
Let's look into it as Eddie Bravo would say look into it
Hey, we also have echelon front our leadership consultancy. We solve problems through leadership
If you need help inside your organization
With anything it's a leadership issue. So go to echelonfront.com for details on that. We also have some events you can come to
Next thing we have next big thing we have we have other things that are sold out in the meantime
But Atlanta October 12th through the 14th, then that is the next muster. We're going to hot Lana
Actually in October, hopefully won't be too hot in hot Lana should be all right
But that's what we're gonna be so if you want to come
check that out and
And also we have an online
training
Academy
It's extreme ownership.com and if look leadership is not something you get good at in one day
You don't go to one seminar just like you don't go to a jiu-jitsu seminar and say, okay, cool
I'm ready to take on Gordon Ryan now. Yeah, right. No, I'm not gonna happen. But you can
Grab individual things from time to time and brawl them right into your game that day
You can do that and that's that's one of the things that happened at the muster
But you better have a game and you better keep training. That's what the academy's for extreme ownership.com all kinds of good stuff going on in there
On top of that if you want to help service members
Active and retired you want to help their families go to our families check out mark lee's mom mama lee
I just talked to mama lee yesterday yesterday was august 2nd
Mark her son was killed on august 2nd in 2006. It's been 16 years since he was killed in action
And that whole time
Almost actually no not even almost from the word go
mama lee
looked to help
She helped the platoons. She helped the task unit. She wanted to make sure you're okay
And she hasn't stopped that in any way shape or form. She's doing a ton of things to help out veterans to help out gold star families
america's mighty warriors org
is
her
Website and if you want to donate or you want to get involved go to that website also heroes and horses
org mica fink is up there in the wilderness
And he sent me a message the other day and he's got i'll i'll get the complete message
But it's basically a person that he's working with that's like a counselor a high-level counselor said
that he had never seen
changes as significant in human beings as he has as he had seen
The the guys that went through mica finks program going in the wilderness for 41 days riding horses eating meat
cold baths
He's got all kinds of things going on i want to go too much into it
But if you want to support that go to heroes and horses org
And if you want to check us out on social media, we're on there, but looks listen listen
We're not in the algorithm. Well, they're gonna try and put us in the algorithm
But we're we don't want you to get caught in the algorithm, but if you want to check out what's going on with us
Dave is at david arberg echo is at echo charles, and i am at jackal willink again watch your six
To use the the flight term watch your six watch your back so you don't get caught
in that algorithm and
Finally to all those uniformed personnel out there
Thank you for fighting for our freedom with a special salute to the airmen
And i don't know if this is right, dave is airmen in the army navy air force and marines all those
What do you call people that work in the air air dales?
There's still marines, huh? There are marines
Well to all of you that own the skies
You all have your own aviation units inside all the service branches
And as much as i love the ground pounders and the doe boys and you know i do
It's you all
Up in the sky that cover for us on the ground
So thank you for your service and sacrifice and also thank you to our police and law enforcement firefighters paramedics
EMTs dispatchers correctional officers border patrol secret service all the first responders
All the first responders thank you for your service and sacrifice as well and for protecting us here
on the home front
And to everyone else out there. There's a part in this book
Where bud is talking to his granddaughter's class and it's 40 years after the war
And one of the students asks something like what is the hardest thing?
about being a pilot
And without hesitation he replies
losing friends
And we get to read this book and we get to hear about the life and experiences of bud anderson
But as i said earlier just remember that there are
hundreds of thousands of stories
That we never heard
Lives that were cut short
In the sky on the ground
And at sea
Brave souls who sacrificed everything
For us
Let us never forget
those heroes
And let's make sure we are living lives that honor that sacrifice
We owe them at least
That much
And until next time this is dave and echo and jaco out